----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

                                           1 

Letters about Vipassåna 

Preface 

This book consists of a compilation of letters on the Dhamma to Sarah Abbott, 
Alan Weller, Robert Kirkpatrick and other friends. These letters were written in 
the period between 1980 until 1992. The material I have used are tapes of Khun 
Sujin’s lectures and conversations with her on the development of right 
understanding. She encourages people to develop understanding of the present 
moment, since that is the way to the ultimate goal, namely, the eradication of 
the clinging to the concept of self and of all other defilements. What the Buddha 
taught is not mere theory, but it is to be applied right now, at this moment. The 
Buddha taught that all mental phenomena and physical phenomena which 
naturally appear in our daily life can be objects of mindfulness and right 
understanding. 

I greatly appreciate Khun Sujin’s constant reminders to develop right 
understanding naturally, and not to force oneself to particular practices. Before 
one realizes it one is lured by clinging to the idea of self. The scriptures are 
subtle, profound in meaning, and when one is reading them one may be deluded 
by wrong understanding. Khun Sujin’s clear explanations of the Dhamma are of 
immense value and can have a great impact on one’s life. I hope that the reader 
will find these letters on vipassanå beneficial. 

******* 

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

                                          2 

Introduction 

I shall explain some terms and notions of the Dhamma I am using in order to 
facilitate the reading of this book. 

It is essential to know the difference between what is real in convential sense 
and what is real in the absolute or ultimate sense. If we only know conventional 
truth and do not know ultimate truth, the clinging to the concept of self and all 
other defilements cannot be eradicated. Notions such as person, world or tree 
are conventional truth, they are concepts we can think of, but they are not real in 
the ultimate sense.Mental phenomena or nåma and physical phenomena or rúpa 
are ultimate realities or paramattha dhammas. They have each their own 
inalterable characteristic, they are real for everybody; the names of realities can 
be changed but their characteristics are inalterable. Nåma is the reality which 
experiences something, whereas rúpa does not experience anything. Seeing, for 
example, is nåma, it experiences visible object which is rúpa. We may change the 
names “seeing” or “visible object”, but their characteristics cannot be changed. 
Seeing is real for everybody, anger is real for everybody, no matter how we name 
it. A person is not real in the ultimate sense, but what we take for a person 
consists of ever changing nåmas and rúpas. 

Citta, or a moment of consciousness, is nåma, it experiences an object. Seeing is 
a citta which experiences visible object, hearing is a citta which experiences 
sound. Cittas experience their appropriate objects through six doors, the doors of 
the senses and the mind-door. 

Cittas are variegated: some cittas are wholesome, kusala, some are 
unwholesome, akusala, and some are neither kusala nor akusala. One citta arises 
at a time and then falls away, to be succeeded by the next citta. Our life is an 
unbroken series of citta. Each citta is accompanied by several mental factors, 
cetasikas, which each perform their own function while they assist the citta in 
knowing the object. Some cetasikas accompany each citta, whereas other types 
of cetasikas accompany only particular types of citta. Attachment, lobha, 
aversion, dosa and ignorance, moha, are akusala cetasikas which accompany 
only akusala cittas. Non-attachment, alobha, non-aversion or kindness, adosa, 

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

                                           3 

and wisdom, amoha or paññå, are sobhana cetasikas, beautiful cetasikas, which 
can accompany only sobhana cittas. 

Citta and cetasika which are both nåma, arise because of their appropriate 
conditions. Wholesome qualities and unwholesome qualities which arose in the 
past can condition the arising of such qualities at present. Since each citta is 
succeeded by the next one wholesome qualities and unwholesome qualities can 
be accumulated from one moment to the next moment, and thus there are 
conditions for their arising at the present time. 

Some cittas are results of akusala kamma and kusala kamma, they are 
vipåkacittas. Kamma is intention or volition. An unwholesome volition can 
motivate an unwholesome deed which can bring an unpleasant result later on, 
and a wholesome volition can motivate a wholesome deed which can bring a 
pleasant result later on. Akusala kamma and kusala kamma are accumulated 
from one moment to the next moment of citta, and thus they can produce result 
later on. Kamma produces result in the form of rebirth-consciousness, or, in the 
course of life, in the form of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and the experience 
of tangible object through the bodysense. These vipåkacittas experience pleasant 
objects or unpleasant objects, depending on the kamma which produces them. 

Cittas which experience objects through the six doors arise in a process of cittas. 
When, for example, hearing arises, it occurs within a series or process of cittas, 
all of which experience sound. Only hearing-consciousness hears, but the other 
cittas within that process, which is called the ear-door process, perform each 
their own function. Hearing-consciousness is vipåkacitta, it merely hears the 
sound, it neither likes it nor dislikes it. After hearing-consciousness has fallen 
away there are, within that process, akusala cittas or kusala cittas which 
experience the sound with unwholesomeness or with wholesomeness. There can 
be akusala cittas with attachment or with aversion towards the sound, or there 
can be kusala cittas. There are processes of cittas experiencing an object through 
the eye-door, the ear-door, the nose-door, the tongue-door, the body-door and 
the mind-door. After the cittas of a sense-door process have fallen away, the 
object is experienced by cittas arising in a mind-door process, and after that 
process has been completed there can be other mind-door processes of cittas 
which think of concepts. Cittas arise and fall away in succession so rapidly that it 

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

                                            4 

seems that cittas such as seeing and thinking of what is seen occur at the same 
time, but in reality there are different types of citta arising in different processes. 
We believe, for example, that we see a table, but in reality there is a process of 
cittas experiencing visible object through the eyesense, and then there is a 
process of cittas experiencing visible object through the mind-door, and later on 
there are other mind-door processes of cittas which think of the concept of table. 
For the development of right understanding it is important to know that there 
are different cittas which experience different objects through the six doorways. 

Rúpa does not know or experience anything. What we call the body consists of 
different kinds of rúpa which arise and then fall away. Rúpas arise and fall away 
in groups or units of rúpas. Each group consists of several kinds of rúpas which 
always include four kinds of rúpas which are called the four Great Elements: the 
Element of Earth or solidity, appearing as hardness or softness, the Element of 
Water or cohesion, the Element of Fire or temperature, appearing as heat or 
cold, and the Element of Wind, appearing as motion or pressure. Solidity, 
temperature and motion or pressure are objects which can be experienced 
through the bodysense, whereas cohesion can only be experienced through the 
mind-door. 

Right understanding of nåma and rúpa can be developed by sati, awareness or 
mindfulness of the nåma and rúpa appearing at the present moment. There are 
many levels of sati; sati is heedful, non-forgetful, of what is wholesome. There is 
sati with generosity, dåna, with the observance of moral conduct, síla, with the 
development of tranquil meditation, samatha, and with the development of 
insight or right understanding, vipassanå. In the development of insight sati is 
mindful of whatever reality presents itself through one of the six doors. Ultimate 
realities, nåma and rúpa, not concepts, are the objects of mindfulness and right 
understanding. 

Paññå develops progressively in different stages of insight knowledge. When the 
first stage of insight knowledge arises there is no doubt about the difference 
between the characteristic of nåma and the characteristic of rúpa. At a higher 
stage of insight the arising and falling away of nåma and rúpa, their 
impermanence, can be penetrated. In the course of the development of insight a 
clearer understanding is gained of the three characteristics of conditioned 

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

                                           5 

realities, namely the characteristics of impermanence, dukkha and non-self. 
Dukkha is translated as suffering or unsatisfactoriness. It is the unsatisfatoriness 
due to the impermanence of conditioned realities. What arises and falls away 
cannot be a true refuge, it is dukkha. 

We come across the terms “development of the eightfold Path”, “development of 
insight”, vipassanå, and “development of satipaììhåna” or the four Applications 
of Mindfulness. All these terms pertain to the development of right 
understanding of mental phenomena, nåma, and physical phenomena, rúpa. By 
the teaching of the four Applications of Mindfulness the Buddha showed that all 
nåmas and rúpas which naturally appear in our daily life can be the objects of 
mindfulness and right understanding. 

******* 

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

                                           6 

Letter about Vipassanå I 

 Dear Dhamma friends, 

Sarah and Jonothan traveled from Hong Kong to Bangkok in order to visit Khun 
Sujin and talk about problems which arise concerning the development of 
satipaììhåna. I received the cassette tapes of these discussions and I would like to 
share with you what I learnt from these tapes. 

 The discussions dealt with the goal of satipaììhåna and the way of its 
development. Right understanding of realities which appear through the six 
doors is the goal. Khun Sujin explained that it is useless to have many moments 
of sati without understanding anything, without understanding the reality which 
appears through one of the six doors. We should remember what the object of 
sati of satipaììhåna is: paramattha dhammas, absolute realities, that is, nåma, 
mental phenomena, and rúpa, physical phenomena, appearing one at a time. 
Before we studied the Dhamma we knew only conventional truth, such as 
people, houses and trees. Through the Dhamma we learn about paramattha 
dhammas, nåma and rúpa. Citta, consciousness, is nåma, it experiences 
something. Rúpa is the reality which does not experience anything. Seeing is a 
citta, it experiences an object, visible object. Visible object is rúpa, it does not 
experience anything. It is useful to combine the study of the suttas with the study 
of the Abhidhamma, Khun Sujin remarked, because this helps us to understand 
our life as being different realities, as nåma and rúpa. 

We should reflect more on the nature of citta, the reality which experiences an 
object. When we know more about the conditions for its arising we shall have 
more understanding of its characteristic of anattå, not self. Khun Sujin reminded 
Sarah and Jonothan that different objects appear because cittas arise in processes 
which experience objects through the doors of eyes, ears, nose, tongue, 
bodysense or mind. When we are fast asleep there are no objects appearing 

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

                                                   7 

through the different doorways. Bhavanga-cittas (life-continuum) are arising and 
falling away in succession, which have as their function to preserve the 
continuity of life as this particular person. If there would not be citta we would 
not be alive. When we are fast asleep we do not know any object of this world, 
we do not know who our parents are, what our possessions are, we are not 
involved with anything of this world. When we wake up we experience again the 
objects of this world. Visible object impinges on the eye-door and is experienced 

                                                                        1 
by seeing and by the other cittas of the eye-door process  . There is sound 
impinging on the ear-door and there are the other sense objects impinging on 
their corresponding doorways. On account of the objects which are experienced 
there are mostly akusala cittas with like or dislike. We keep on thinking of the 
objects which are experienced through the senses and we create long stories 
about people and things. We take it for granted that different objects appear all 
day long, but, we should remember that they appear just because there are cittas 
arising in processes, víthi-cittas. In the case of seeing, several conditions are 
needed for seeing to experience visible object. Seeing is vipåkacitta, the result of 
kamma, a deed performed in the past. Eyesense is also a condition for seeing; 
eyesense is produced by kamma. Visible object is another condition for seeing; if 
it would not impinge on the eyesense there could not be seeing. Seeing sees 
visible object, and then there is paying attention to shape and form which is not 
seeing. It is important to reflect on the difference between seeing and thinking of 
concepts such as people and things. In that way it will be clearer that realities 
such as seeing and visible object can be the objects of mindfulness and right 
understanding, and that conventional truth, concepts or ideas, are objects of 
thinking but not objects of awareness. However, the reality which thinks about 
concepts is a type of nåma and thus it can be object of awareness. Khun Sujin 
said that when there is more intellectual understanding based on study and 
reflection, sati can arise, and direct understanding of the characteristics of 
realities can be developed. 

 I shall quote from a letter of Alan Weller in England, who describes his own 
experience concerning the study of Dhamma, in order to encourage my husband 
Lodewijk: 

1 
  See Intro. 

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

                                           8 

“I remember getting stuck with Khun Sujin's tapes, listening to the same ones 
over and over again. Books like the Visuddhimagga used to send me to sleep. I 
could not cope with the endless classifications. However, very gradually I just 
keep on walking. I have no problems now with the Visuddhimagga and I delight 
in its precision. The teachings are so wide, books, tapes, discussions with people. 
I like to study what I am interested in and if I find something tiring or difficult I 
turn to what I find interesting. The Jåtaka stories are very easy to read and so 
useful for daily life. The wide reading is a condition to have great respect for 
Khun Sujin's words on the tape, for without those tapes I could not understand 
the depth of the Dhamma or have the confidence that I have now. This is my 
advice to Lodewijk: just keep on walking.” 

Alan refers to what Khun Sujin once said in India: “Keep on walking, even if it is 
just one step at a time.” We should have more confidence in the value of 
listening to the Dhamma, studying the scriptures and reflecting on the Dhamma 
again and again. This is a condition for right understanding of nåma and rúpa, 
and this understanding is being accumulated. We can be sure that in this way 
conditions are being built up for the arising of direct awareness and direct 
understanding which is different from thinking about realities. 

 The gradual development of understanding is in the scriptures (Gradual 
Sayings, Book of the Sevens, Ch VII, par. 7) compared to the wearing out of a 
knife handle which one holds each day. However, it wears out so slowly that one 
cannot see its wearing away. Jonothan remarked that if one's practice is right 
one should see some progress. He found that there was no sati while working in 
his office. The world of work seems to be different from the world of Dhamma. 
He thought that being under stress was not a good condition for sati. One should 
be in the right mood and have some leisure time. 

Khun Sujin answered that this is only thinking. One shouldknow the difference 
between a moment of experiencing a reality and thinking. Only through 
satipaììhåna one can know the difference. This is a good reminder. We are so 
involved in our thoughts about having sati, finding ways to have more, but what 
is there right at that moment? Only a nåma which thinks. When we realize this, 
the infatuation is gone, no more worry about sati. Khun Sujin said: 

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

                                                9 

“Do not think of the past or the future, just be aware. Realities appear, why do 
you have to move away from them. That is not the way to understand this 
moment. There is seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching or thinking, no 
matter whether one is working or not. If sati does not arise often it is because 
there are not enough conditions for it. Does one just want to have it? Develop 
it!“ 

If one has no understanding of cittas which experience objects through the six 
doors one does not know how to apply Khun Sujin's words, "develop sati now". 
Time and again objects such as visible object, sound or tangible object are 
appearing. They can only appear because there is citta which experiences them. 
Did we consider this enough? There may be sound but if hearing-consciousness 
does not arise sound is not an object which is experienced, sound does not 
appear. We believe that we see the world of people and different things, but 
there is only citta which thinks about what has appeared to seeing. Seeing does 
not occur at the same time as thinking. Seeing experiences visible object which 
has impinged on the eyesense, it does not pay attention to shape and form. 
However, seeing conditions thinking of shape and form, of defining them as 
people and different things. Khun Sujin writes in her book "A Survey of 
Paramattha Dhammas": 

 “Since cittas succeed one another very rapidly, it seems that there is the world 
which does not disintegrate, the world which is lasting and which is full of 
beings and many different things. In reality the world lasts just for one moment 
and then it falls away.” 

If we have a bowl of fruits on the table we can look at them and they do not 
seem to fall away. It is helpful to know the reason. Realities, paramattha 
dhammas, such as visible object which is a kind of rúpa, fall away. However, we 
keep on thinking about the stories we create. The concepts such as fruit we can 
think of are not paramattha dhammas, they are not realities, thus they do not 

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

                                                  10 

arise and fall away. They are merely made up by our thinking. 

 Khun Sujin said to Jonothan: 

“When one is busy with one's work, just keep on remembering that sati can be 
aware of any moment. When there is not forgetfulness but awareness, one can 
begin to have some understanding, even though it be very little, of what is real. 
Citta is real, it experiences an object. A dead body, even if there are still eyes and 
ears, cannot experience anything. Citta experiences. The experience is a reality. 
We should not be attached to the idea of, ‘how can I have more sati’. It can grow 
in a few lifetimes. Let us talk about seeing and visible object so that there can be 
conditions to be aware of them. If there is no understanding of this moment how 
can understanding grow? Considering visible object in the office is not different 
from considering visible object at this moment. There is no need to change the 
situation or to do anything else in order to develop right understanding. When 
sati is not hindered by wrong ideas we may have about it, it can arise freely and 
show its characteristic of anattå , not self or mine. Also when one talks about 
conventional things in the office there can be awareness of nåma and rúpa.” 

Jonothan said that he would continue to consider visible object, since it is there 
all the time. Khun Sujin remarked that a few moments of awareness now are 
better than thinking of having many moments of it in the future, when one has 
free time. Are we inclined to put off kusala to a later time? 

We read in the "Gradual Sayings" (Book of the Fours, First Fifty,Ch I, par. 6) 
about four kinds of people: a person of small learning who doesn't profit thereby, 
a person of small learning who profits thereby, a person of wide learning who 
doesn't profit thereby and a person of wide learning who profits thereby. We 
read: 

In this case, monks, a certain person has small learning in Sutta, Geyya, 

                                                                                                  2 
Veyyåkaraùa, Gåthå, Udåna, Itivuttaka, Jåtaka, Abbhutadhammå and Vedalla  ; 

2  A classification of the Dhamma as suttas without and with verses, expository matter including 

Abhidhamma, Birth stories, marvels, etc. 

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

                                                11 

yet, as of that small learning he knows not the letter, knows not the meaning, he 
does not live in accordance with Dhamma. That, monks, is how a person with 
small learning profits not thereby. 

And in what way, monks, is a person of small learning profited thereby? 

In this case, monks, a certain person has small learning in Sutta... ; but, as of 
that small learning he knows both the letter and the meaning, he lives in 
accordance with Dhamma. That, monks, is how a person of small learning profits 
thereby. 

We then read about the person with wide learning who does not profit thereby 
and the person of wide learning who profits thereby. Of these two kinds of 
persons the same is said as in the case of the person with small learning who 
does not profit thereby and the person with small learning who profits thereby. 

According to the commentary, the "Manorathapúraùí", the person with small 
learning who lives in accordance with the Dhamma, who profits thereby, has 

                           3 
eradicated the åsavas  . The same is true for the person with wide learning who 
profits thereby. Thus, when one studies the Dhamma and develops satipaììhåna 
one can become enlightened and finally attain arahatship. 

 Alan Weller wrote: 

“The last few weeks I have been very busy and have had little time for reading or 
writing. The sutta about profiting even from small learning is very useful. I often 
find myself wanting to read or study and I am forgetful of the reality which is 
there at that moment. We all need lots of details because defilements are so 
crafty to move us away from the present moment.” 

People may have misunderstandings about satipatthåna, they doubt whether it 
can be developed also during the time they are working. These 
misunderstandings arise because they confuse sati with concentration. They 
believe that they should concentrate onrealities in order to be aware of them. We 
should know that there can be wrong concentration, arising with akusala citta. 

3 The “Intoxicants”, a group of defilements. 

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

                                                12 

                                                     4 
Concentration is a cetasika, a mental factor  , which arises with each citta. Its 
function is to focus on one object at a time. Concentration does not last, it falls 
away immediately together with the citta it accompanies. If one thinks that one 
has to concentrate on nåma and rúpa there is thinking with attachment. One 
tries to control sati but that is impossible. When there are conditions for the 
arising of right mindfulness and right understanding, there is also right 
concentration without the need to think of concentration. 

Citta and cetasika are conditioned nåmas. There is one citta at a time and each 
citta is accompanied by several cetasikas which each perform their own function 
while they assist the citta in knowing an object. If we do not know that 
understanding, mindfulness and right concentration are cetasikas which 
accompany kusala citta, we shall cling to them and have wrong view about them. 
We need to know many details because defilements are deeply rooted. 

Khun Sujin said that people who develop satipaììhåna naturally, in daily life, 
have more detachment than those who do not develop it naturally. If one 
develops satipaììhåna naturally one does not try to exert control over sati or the 
objects of sati. A moment of awareness may arise and after that moments of 
forgetfulness. One can learn to notice the difference between such moments. 
Does at this moment a paramattha dhamma appear, or is there thinking of a 
concept? There can be awareness of a moment of ignorance which just occurred 
so that it can be realized as a conditioned reality. 

Jonothan remarked that visible object is different from what we think it is. We 
tend to speculate about it, we are wondering how far the visible object we see at 
this moment extends. We make it into something abstract, but in reality it is just 
that which is seen. All that appears through the eyesense is visible object. If one 
were blind it could not appear. Khun Sujin asked whether visible object can 
move. When we notice a change of position of what we perceive it is only 
thinking. Because of remembrance of past experiences one believes that one sees 
people move. If there can be a moment of awareness of one reality there will be 
less clinging to a concept of a "whole", to an image of a person walking. 

When we hear a dog barking different moments of experience arise. Hearing 
hears that particular sound and then we remember that it is the sound of a dog. 

4 See Intro. 

----------------------- Page 13-----------------------

                                                 13 

We can remind ourselves that it is not "I" who remembers but saññå, 
remembrance or perception, a cetasika which remembers an object or "marks" it 
so that it can be recognized later on. Saññå accompanies each citta, be it seeing 
or hearing or the citta which thinks of concepts. We recognize people and things 
because of saññå. Previous experiences have been accumulated and they are 
remembered. Also in the past the sound of a dog was heard, we learnt what a 
dog is and the way it barks. Because of saññå we can imitate its barking, or, 
when other people imitate its barking we can know that it is not the barking of a 
dog. "Sound does not know that you are thinking about it", Khun Sujin said, 
reminding us that there is no being, no dog in the sound. It is only rúpa which 
impinges on the earsense; when there are the right conditions a particular sound, 
pleasant or unpleasant, can be heard. The sound only appears when it is the 

                               5 
right time for víthi-cittas   arising in the ear-door process. When we are fast 
asleep there may be sound, but it is not heard. 

Seeing, hearing and the other sense-cognitions are followed by thinking which 
thinks about what was experienced. We are absorbed in the concepts we are 
thinking of. Khun Sujin said that it takes time to realize that one lives with one's 
own thoughts, in one's own world of thinking. It is useful to know about the 
function of the cetasika vitakka, which can be translated as thinking. It 
accompanies many cittas, though not every citta. It "touches" the object which is 
experienced, or it leads citta to the object, so that citta can experience it. We 
read in the suttas about vitakka which is akusala: thinking with desire, with hate 
and with cruelty. We also read about vitakka which is sobhana (beautiful): 
thinking with detachment (nekkhamma), with non-aversion or kindness, and 
with non-violence. There is right thinking, sammå-sankappa, of the eightfold 
Path. It "touches" the object of awareness, a nåma or a rúpa, so that paññå can 
know it as it is. 

If we do not know that thinking is due to the activity of vitakka we are bound to 
take it for self. We think most of the time with akusala citta, we can become 
confused by the stories we create ourselves. 

Someone wrote to me that he was infatuated with his ownfantasies which went 
on for a long time. He found himself a mean person because of that. If one thinks 

5 Cittas arising in a process, see Intro. 

----------------------- Page 14-----------------------

                                                 14 

of oneself as a mean person one takes one's akusala for "self". One can learn from 
such experiences that thinking is beyond control, anattå. Defilements arise 
because there are conditions for their arising. The writer of the letter thought 
that his fantasies were the consequence of the education he had had. However, 
this is merely a "story" one may think of but which does not explain the deepest 
cause. It can happen to all of us that we suddenly, for no apparent reason, have 
very ugly thoughts, thoughts of jealousy or even thoughts of hatred, and we may 
wonder where these come from. There were countless lives before this life, and 
during these lives we accumulated many defilements. We do not know what our 
past lives were like, but during the cycle there must have been births as an 
animal. The defilements of all past lives have been accumulated from moment to 
moment and they can arise at any time with akusala citta, they can even 
motivate bad deeds. We experience sense objects usually with akusala cittas 
since we accumulated such an extent of akusala. When we notice our 
defilements it is of no use to keep on thinking about them with aversion, then we 
will only accumulate more akusala. We can learn to develop right understanding 
also of akusala which arises, in order to see it as not self, only a conditioned 
reality. Khun Sujin explained: 

“We should be brave and encounter the reality at that very moment with right 
understanding, then there is right effort. It is difficult to follow the Middle Way, 
that is, to follow all realities naturally. Through right understanding one will see 
more clearly one's own akusala, also the more subtle attachment to sense 
objects.” 

The study of the Abhidhamma can remind us that the different cittas which are 
accompanied by cetasikas arise because of their own conditions and fall away 
immediately. When one, for example, has the intention to abstain from akusala 
but one cannot do so in a particular situation, one should remember that it is not 

                                                                     6 
self who can abstain but that there are cetasikas, "virati   cetasikas", which have 
the function of abstaining. They are: abstention from wrong speech, from wrong 
action and from wrong livelihood. When virati cetasika does not arise we cannot 

6 virati means abstinence. 

----------------------- Page 15-----------------------

                                             15 

possibly abstain from akusala. Only through the development of satipaììhåna can 
there be more conditions for abstention from akusala. 

We read in the "Stories of the Mansions" (Khuddaka Nikåya,Vimånavatthu, V, 
Great Chariot, 53, the Mansion of Chatta) that the brahman youth Chatta was on 
his way to pay his teacher. Thieves were waiting for him in order to kill and rob 
him. The Buddha sat under a tree on the road Chatta was taking and he taught 
him out of compassion the three refuges and the five precepts. Chatta continued 
on his way, reflecting on the Buddha's teaching, and then he was killed by the 
robbers. He was reborn a deva and showed himself with his luminous mansion. 
the Buddha asked him of which deed his rebirth was the result so that many 
people would know the deed of merit Chatta had done. Chatta explained that he 
first did not want to take the three refuges and that he afterwards did so. Evenso 
he did not want to take the five precepts but afterwards he did so. We read that 
he said: 

I approached the glorious Conquerer for refuge, and Dhamma too, likewise the 
Order of monks. First I said "No", revered sir; afterwards I did your bidding 
faithfully. 

Live not in any way impurely, hurting any breathing thing, for wise men do not 
praise lack of restraint towards breathing things. First I said "No", revered sir; 
afterwards I did your bidding faithfully... 

We read that he after the teaching of each of the five preecepts first said "No", 
and then afterwards, took the precept. We read further on: 

Even a little done in the Tathågata's Dhamma is of great fruition, a wide-spread 
fruit. Behold how Chatta, through merit done, illumines the earth even as does 
the sun.... 

It can happen to all of us that we first say "No", when we think that we cannot 
abstain from akusala. However, when kusala citta arises it can be done. Even a 

----------------------- Page 16-----------------------

                                          16 

brief moment of kusala is very beneficial. When we learn that satipaììhåna 
should be developed naturally, in daily life, also in our work situation, we may at 
first say, "No, I cannot do it." But when there are conditions for kusala citta with 
right understanding we see that it can be done. Or we may think, "No, I cannot 
be aware of akusala, I must make it disappear first." When there is more 
understanding of citta and cetasika which arise because of their own conditions 
we can learn that it is not self but sati which can be aware of the characteristic of 
akusala. 

Sarah was wondering why it is necessary to learn so many details about citta, 
cetasika and rúpa. Is it not enough to read just one page of the scriptures one's 
whole life? Khun Sujin answered that the Buddha did not have to teach for a 
long time to those who had conditions to attain enlightenment soon. However, 
for us it is different. We may read, "Seeing is impermanent", but this is not 
enough for us. We need to listen much, read and study much and consider the 
Dhamma often. We have to learn to be aware again and again, with right 
understanding of the characteristics of the realities which appear now. Kusala 
citta and akusala citta can arise shortly one after the other and there has to be 
awareness and keen understanding so that their different characteristics can be 
known. Kusala citta with pleasant feeling may arise and after that akusala citta 
with pleasant feeling and attachment to the idea of "my kusala" may arise. Do we 
know the difference between such moments? 

Sarah said that she likes to earn money with her work since that gives her an 
opportunity to travel to Bangkok or to England. But she finds that the Dhamma 
makes one feel ashamed of liking to earn money. Khun Sujin said: "You don't 
understand yourself completely, you are not honest with yourself. If one does not 
understand one's own accumulations, one has ambitions to be the Dhamma 
way." Those who have attained enlightenment are "people who walk straight", 
"ujupatipanno". They know their accumulations, they are honest to themselves. 
Sometimes I feel ashamed about liking to read magazines and novels. However, 
satipaììhåna should be developed naturally, so that one realizes one's 
accumulated inclinations as not self. Next to my bed I have suttas as well as 
magazines and novels. At times I take up a sutta, at times a magazine or novel. I 
cannot tell beforehand what I will do, it is dependent on conditions. Also while 

----------------------- Page 17-----------------------

                                                17 

reading a magazine there can be a few moments of considering visible object and 
then one is absorbed again in the story, which is a different moment. 

When we look at other people satipaììhåna can be developed naturally. When we 
see colours of hair, lips, eyebrows or skin, we think of them as belonging to the 
different parts of the body, but we should remember that all these colours are 
just visible object, they appear through the eyesense. They could not appear if we 
close our eyes. Colour which appears is not the same colour all over, it is not all 
grey or black. Many different colours appear but they are just visible object, they 
are experienced by seeing. While we are eating many different flavours appear, 
such as flavour which is sweet, sour or salty. Tasting-consciousness experiences 
all the different flavours which impinge on the tastingsense. There is such a great 
variety of colours, sounds, odours, flavours and tangible objects which appear 
and are experienced by the appropriate sense-cognitions through the 
corresponding sense-doors. If we remember this we shall not imagine the objects 
of seeing, hearing and the other sense-cognitions to be other than they really are. 
Then satipaììhåna can develop more naturally. After the sense-door process has 
been completed, the object is experienced through the mind-door, and then there 
are other mind-door processes of cittas which define the object and think about 
it. 

We should not worry about it when satipaììhåna does not often arise. When 
Khun Sujin was in England, she said that one should not cling to the stages of 
insight, vipassanå ñåùas: 

“We do not mind about vipassanå ñåùa, there should just be understanding of 
the reality appearing at this moment. It is so anattå, there should not be any 
expectation. So long as there are expectations vipassanå ñåùa cannot arise.” 

Khun Sujin reminds us time and again that we should always be humble, a 
"nobody", instead of somebody. A wise person who understands realities which 
arise because of their own conditions will be less attracted by honour, praise or 
gain. Do we think of "my development", is there an idea of "I did it"? Then we 
want to be somebody, and that is not the right way. 

----------------------- Page 18-----------------------

                                           18 

Sarah said to Khun Sujin that it is very hard to see the danger of the arising of 
nåma and rúpa, to see the benefit of not having them anymore. Khun Sujin 
answered: 

“That is why there are many stages of vipassanå. Even when the arising and 
falling away of realities is experienced it is not enough. Attachment and the 
other defilements are so deeply rooted. It needs higher and higher understanding 
to see the danger of the arising and falling away of nåma and rúpa. They appear 
and then disappear immediately, but the succeeding ones arise and thus there 
will be attachment again. Attachment is so attached to any object which arises. 
We can talk a great deal about the impermanence of realities, but this does not 
mean anything if the reality of this moment is not directly experienced as 
impermanent.” 

Sarah asked: 

“Is it of any use at all to think of the impermanence of realities if it is not directly 
experienced?” 

Khun Sujin answered: 

“It is right thinking which is wholesome, but it cannot eradicate akusala. That is 
why the Buddha told us to develop more understanding. He spoke about the 
objects awareness should be aware of, so that right understanding can grow. The 
knowledge of all details can condition paññå to see the characteristic of anattå of 
all realities. One may read the scriptures but if there is no awareness of the 
present moment we shall not understand what has been taught in the 
scriptures.” 

----------------------- Page 19-----------------------

                                                                            19 

 ********** 

----------------------- Page 20-----------------------

                                          20 

Letter about Vipassanå2 

When Khun Sujin was in England Alan Weller recorded thediscussions he had 
with her. These recordings contain many precious reminders about satipaììhåna 
in daily life and therefore I would like to share these with all of you. The 
discussions were about citta (consciousness), cetasika (mental factors arising 
with the citta) and rúpa (physical phenomena). They were about cittas which 
experience objects through the six doors of eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense 
and mind. 

There are many different types of citta arising in daily life. There is seeing of 
visible object and there is the interpretation of what was seen and this is not 
seeing but thinking. When there are conditions for awareness it can arise and be 
aware of any object which appears, be it visible object, seeing, feeling or 
thinking. When there is awareness we do not have to name or label any reality, 
there is the direct experience of the characteristics of realities. Seeing is just the 
experience of what is visible, it has its own characteristic, we do not have to 
name it. Thinking is just thinking, it has its own characteristic, we do not have to 
name it. 

Seeing sees visible object but it lasts only for an extremely short moment and 
then it is gone. Visible object does not last either, it falls away. Seeing can only 
see, it cannot think of visible object. If one wants to concentrate on seeing or 
visible object, if one has any idea of fixing one’s attention on them with the 
purpose of knowing them, it prevents right understanding of realities. We cannot 
stare at visible object, since it is seen just for a moment, and then it falls away. 
We may think about it, but that is not direct awareness of its characteristic. 

I would like to transcribe a dialogue between Khun Sujin and Alan about this 
subject: 

Khun Sujin: “The more one understands that thinking thinks, the more visible 
object will appear as visible object. It does not matter at all if there is thinking 
because there are conditions for thinking almost all the time. There is the 
experience of objects through the sense-doors and then thinking.” 

----------------------- Page 21-----------------------

                                           21 

Alan: “We have to know, not through thinking, but through direct experience.” 

Kh. S. : “That is why there should be awareness of thinking and the 
understanding of it as just a reality.“ 

A. :“That is it, visible object should be separated from thinking.” 

Kh. S. : “That is why it is necessary to be aware of thinking, so that realities can 
be understood. Many people do not want to think, they try to stop thinking. They 
believe that in that way they can understand realities.” 

A. : “The thinking is very fast. Seeing sees visible object and then there is 
thinking.” 

Kh.S. : “The development of awareness is necessary in order to understand 
thinking. Visible object appears very shortly and then there is thinking. One 
thinks about a particular thing.” 

A. : “We are picking out one thing from the visible object by our thinking. Just 
one idea.” 

Kh.S. : “Then some ‘thing’ is there, even if we do not name it. When we point at 
something there is thinking, not seeing. For the experience of visible object you 
don't have to point.” 

A. : “I was looking at curtains but I did not notice the pattern of pine-apples, 
because I was not thinking of it. Only when someone said that there were pine- 
apples I recognized the pine-apples.” 

Kh.S. : “Because then you were thinking about it. What is seen now is just a 
reality and then the thinking thinks a lot. This happens all the time, no matter 
whether you read a book, watch T.V., look at paintings or look while you walk in 
the street. There can be understanding of the true nature of realities at such 
moments.” 

A. : “There are just different types of thinking when one selects things from the 
visible object.“ 

Kh.S. : “One begins to understand that there is nobody, thinking thinks only.” 

A. : “Thinking is just a reality which thinks. There is no one, just realities. That is 
the meaning of being alone.” 

----------------------- Page 22-----------------------

                                             22 

Kh.S. : “This is the way to become detached from realities we used to take for ‘I’. 
There is all the time the idea of ‘I think’, ‘I see’; ‘I,I,I’, all the time. At the 
moments there is no attention to shape and form, awareness of realities can 
develop. There is not only visible object, there is also sound. Awareness can be 
aware of any reality, without thinking. There is sound which appears, then 
visible object, then sound again, all such moments are extremely short. 
Awareness can follow all kinds of realities.” 

A. : “When we pay attention to shape and form is there usually lobha 
(attachment)?” 

Kh.S. : “When the feeling is not unpleasant, thus, pleasant or indifferent, there is 
usually lobha. Lobha arises when we read a newspaper or look at a picture, but 
sati can be aware of realities in daily life. Sati should be very ‘daily’.“ 

A. : “I think that there is no difference between this or that particular situation.” 

Kh.S. : “There is no difference at all. The six doorways are the same, everywhere. 
One has to become detached. This cannot be achieved by a self, only by 
understanding. Through satipaììhåna one will see more clearly one's 
accumulated inclinations. Satipaììhåna should be naturally developed. No matter 
whether one moves around or looks at something, awareness can be aware and 
right understanding can understand. Every reality arises and then falls away very 
rapidly, but awareness can follow different realities which appear. Instead of 
thinking too much about other people, awareness can be aware of realities. We 
may think about others and wonder why they behave like that, but what about 
our own citta? Awareness leads one back to ‘one's own reality’.“ 

It is true, we may have aversion about someone else's behaviour, but aversion 
falls away and instead of thinking for a long time about it there can be 
awareness of whatever reality appears. 

Some people, when they hear about citta, cetasika and rúpa, say that they do not 
like the Abhidhamma, that they prefer the suttas. They think that the 
Abhidhamma is too theoretical. It depends on one's personal inclination to what 
extent one will study the Abhidhamma, but if there is no knowledge at all about 
nåma, the reality which experiences something, and rúpa, the reality which does 

----------------------- Page 23-----------------------

                                          23 

not experience anything, one cannot develop the eightfold path. One does not 
know what the object of awareness is. One does not know that a concept such as 
the whole body or a person cannot be object of awareness, but only an object of 
thinking. One nåma or rúpa at a time as it appears through one of the six doors 
can be object of awareness. If one begins to be aware of the characteristic of 
seeing which appears, or the characteristic of visible object, or the characteristic 
of any other reality which appears, one will understand that the Abhidhamma 
explains the realities of our daily life. Also the suttas are full of Abhidhamma, 
one cannot really understand them without any knowledge of paramattha 
dhammas. Time and again we read in the suttas about the objects which are 
experienced through the six doors, we read about seeing, hearing, smelling, 
tasting, the experience of tangible object and the experience of objects through 
the mind-door. If we do not know that the experiences of the objects through the 
six doorways are different cittas, we take all experiences for self. 

We learn through the Abhidhamma and also through the suttas that cittas are 
accompanied by different cetasikas, mental factors. Not everybody is inclined to 
study cetasikas in detail, but if one does not know anything about them one does 
not see that akusala citta is so different from kusala citta because they are 
accompanied by different types of cetasikas. Defilements as well as wholesome 
qualities are cetasikas which accompany citta. The factors of the eightfold Path, 
such as right understanding and right mindfulness, are cetasikas. When these 
factors which accompany kusala citta arise, the eightfold Path is being 
developed, just for a moment, and then citta and the accompanying cetasikas fall 
away. Sati and paññå can be accumulated and then there are conditions for 
another moment of developing the eightfold Path, later on. Understanding 
develops from moment to moment. If we understand that life exists only in one 
moment, we shall be less inclined to believe that there is a self who could 
develop the eightfold Path continuously. This would not be according to the 
truth, because the next moment is likely to be akusala. If we know that right 
effort is a cetasika which arises just for a moment we shall cling less to an idea of 
self who exerts effort in the development of the eightfold Path. 

We think that we should develop understanding, but actually it is understanding, 
paññå, which develops. There is nobody who develops understanding. Khun 

----------------------- Page 24-----------------------

                                          24 

Sujin remarked: 

“In the beginning it seems that ‘I’ am developing, but later on one realizes that it 
is right understanding, paññå, which grows. One comes to the conclusion that 
nobody can do anything.” 

Alan said: 

“Because each moment is conditioned, one can't do anything or control anything, 
not even the development of right understanding. It is conditioned by what one 
has learnt or considered.“ 

Khun Sujin remarked: 

“Even if one considers oneself a Buddhist, it depends on conditions whether one 
can read wisely or consider wisely. Or does one just want to be ‘somebody’ 
instead of developing right understanding? 

It is quite difficult to develop understanding of visible object at this moment, to 
realize that there is not anybody in the visible object which is seen. It takes time 
to listen again and again, to be aware again and again. Without awareness and 
understanding of this moment there is no way to eliminate desire. There is desire 
if one wants to have a special experience instead of developing understanding. I 
do not tell anybody to do this or that first in order to be aware, there is no 
technique which should be applied. One thinks too much and tries too much. 
When can there be satipaììhåna? When there is enough understanding to 
condition it.” 

One may be very keen to reach the different stages of insight, but if there is such 
a wish, is there not an idea of self? We should not force ourselves to reach 
something for which we are not ready yet. Khun Sujin said: 

----------------------- Page 25-----------------------

                                         25 

“This moment of gaining understanding is enough for thismoment, and thus the 
development can continue naturally. There should be contentedness with one's 
own ability. 

We should be grateful to the Buddha for the understanding we have gained 
already, even if it is not a great deal yet. If there is not much understanding now, 
it is because it was not developed much in the past. It takes aeons to develop it. 
We should remember that right understanding is a conditioned reality, we 
cannot hasten its development. If we try to do so, we are clinging to the idea of 
self. However, understanding is developed in order to get rid of the idea of self.” 

A friend wrote to me about a meditation technique he applies in order to 
experience the impermanence of rúpas of the body. Through concentration on 
rúpas of the body he thinks that he can experience the change of rúpas such as 
heat of the body. He finds it such an intellectual struggle to grasp the truth of 
anattå (non-self) and through the experience of impermanence he believes that 
he can realize the truth of anattåmore easily. He thinks that by this method all 
the stages of insight, vipassanå ñåùas, can be reached. 

When the rúpa which is heat appears, there must also be nåma which 
experiences heat. In order to know the truth there should not only be awareness 
of rúpa but also of nåma, the element which experiences something. If there is 
no awareness and right understanding which realizes nåma as nåma and rúpa as 
rúpa, there is an idea of self who feels hot or "my body" which is hot. There is 
"somebody" or "something" there, thus, one clings to a "self". There is the deeply 
rooted idea of self, even when we do not think, "I feel", or "This is my body". 

It is not easy to understand the meaning of anattå, as the writer of the letter 
remarks. We should consider what the Buddha taught about anattå . He clearly 
showed the conditions for each reality which arises. Since there are conditions 
for the nåmas and rúpas which arise we cannot exert control over their arising. 
"Beyond control" is one way to describe the nature of anattå. When the right 
conditions are present, a rúpa such as heat may impinge on the bodysense. 
Bodysense is a kind of rúpa which is produced by kamma. Nobody can create his 

----------------------- Page 26-----------------------

                                         26 

own bodysense. The bodysense is all over the body, it can be outside or inside. 
When heat impinges on the bodysense there are conditions for the arising of 
body-consciousness which experiences the heat just for a short moment and then 
it falls away. It merely experiences the heat and it does not know anything else. 
Feeling accompanies the body-consciousness, it is a cetasika which feels on 
account of the tangible object which is experienced. When tangible object is 
pleasant, pleasant bodily feeling accompanies body-consciousness, and when it is 
unpleasant, painful bodily feeling accompanies body-consciousness. Shortly 
afterwards there are likely to be akusala cittas which may be akusala cittas 
rooted in attachment, accompanied by pleasant or by indifferent feeling, or 
akusala cittas rooted in aversion, accompanied by unpleasant feeling, or akusala 
cittas rooted in ignorance, accompanied by indifferent feeling. Sometimes there 
can be kusala cittas accompanied by pleasant feeling or by indifferent feeling. 
We can learn through awareness that when the feeling is not unpleasant there is 
usually attachment to objects. 

At first it may seem easy to be aware only of rúpas of the body. When we learn 
more about different types of nåma and rúpa we can see that it is not easy to 
have precise knowledge of any of them. 

When there is awareness of either nåma or rúpa rightunderstanding of their 
characteristics can develop. When heat appears its characteristic can be known 
as only a rúpa. We do not have to think whether it is external heat or internal 
heat, we do not have to think of the spot of the body where it appears. It is only 
a rúpa which appears just for a moment, it does not belong to "my body", it is 
beyond control. Understanding of the different types of nåma and rúpa which 
appear through the appropriate doorways develops very gradually. It is only later 
on that paññå can realize the three general characteristics of nåma and rúpa, 
which are impermanence, dukkha and anattå. 

One may believe that one can select the object of awareness, but it depends on 
the sati of which object it is aware. Sati is a cetasika, and understanding, paññå, 
is another cetasika. When there are the right conditions kusala citta accompanied 
by sati and paññå can arise. One cannot select any object of awareness, all 
realities which appear are beyond control. The Buddha spoke about the six doors 
in order to remind people that all realities of daily life should be known as they 

----------------------- Page 27-----------------------

                                         27 

are. 

It is not easy at all to know precisely, through directunderstanding, what nåma is 
and what rúpa. When paññå is still weak we are not sure whether a 
characteristic of rúpa or of nåma appears. Understanding has to be developed 
again and again. When there is direct experience of hardness or heat we may 
have doubts whether that was mindfulness or not. The fact that hardness or heat 
can be directly experienced without having to think about them does not mean 
that there is mindfulness of them. They are directly experienced by body- 
consciousness which is vipåkacitta, and this citta is not accompanied by sati. 
After that there may be akusala cittas with subtle clinging to hardness or heat, 
but one may take that for mindfulness. When one tries to concentrate on realities 
in order to know them there is akusala citta with clinging; there is desire to 
know, not mindfulness. 

It does not matter if mindfulness does not arise yet. It is conditioned by listening 
to the Dhamma, reading and considering, thus, by right understanding. Our goal 
should not be: having sati for its own sake. Sati without the development of 
understanding of the nåma and rúpa which appear will not lead to the 
eradication of the idea of "self". The following sutta can remind us that there 
should be the development of understanding of rúpa as rúpa and of nåma as 
nåma, as elements devoid of self. We read in the "Kindred Sayings" (II, Nidåna- 
vagga, Ch XIV, Kindred Sayings on Elements, § 1) that the Buddha, while he was 
at Såvatthí , said to the monks: 

What, monks, is the diversity in elements? The elements of eye, of visible object, 
of seeing-consciousness; the elements of ear, of sound, of hearing-consciousness; 
the elements of nose, of odour, of smelling-consciousness; the elements of 
tongue, of taste, of tasting-consciousness; the elements of body-sense, of 
tangibles, of body-consciousness; the elements of mind, of mental objects, of the 
experience of mental objects. This, monks, is called diversity in elements. 

We should reflect more on this sutta. Seeing can only arise when there are visible 
object and eyesense, thus, it can only arise when there are the appropriate 

----------------------- Page 28-----------------------

                                                   28 

conditions. The nåma-elements and rúpa-elements of our life arise because of 
conditions, they are not self, they are beyond control. When heat appears, 
understanding of its characteristic can be developed for that short moment, so 
that it can be known as a rúpa element. It is rúpa, not part of "my body", not self. 
It does not know anything, it is different from nåma. When feeling appears, 
understanding can be developed of its characteristic as a nåma element. It is 
nåma, an element which experiences something, different from rúpa. There is no 
self who experiences. 

When understanding is developed at the moment of mindfulness, there will be 
less doubt about the fact whether there was sati or not. Sati can arise naturally in 
daily life, while seeing, hearing or experiencing objects through the other 
doorways. Doubt about mindfulness is bound to arise, but then we can be 
mindful of doubt as a kind of nåma which is conditioned. Khun Sujin reminds us: 
"Begin again, be aware again." Sati can follow all kinds of realities appearing 
through the six doors. We should not try to hold on to any reality, then we are 
forgetful of what appears at the present moment. We should not try to select any 
object in order to be mindful of it. Since sati and paññå are anattå there cannot 
be any rule that there should first be mindfulness of rúpas of the body, then of 
feelings, then of cittas and then of other dhammas. 

The first stage of insight which clearly distinguishes nåma from rúpa may seem 
to be far away, but it is useful to know that this is the first stage. When one 
experiences changes of the body temperature or notices the appearance and 
disappearance of sound, one may believe that one experiences the 
impermanence of rúpas. However, the arising and falling away of nåma and rúpa 
is the fourth stage of insight or the first stage of "principal insight", mahå- 
vipassanå, and this cannot be realized if the first stage of "tender insight" has not 

                  1 
been reached  . 

We are inclined to name or label the objects which appear and to think about 
them for a long time instead of being mindful of them in order to know them as 
nåma or as rúpa. Khun Sujin reminded Alan: 

1 
  The first three stages of insight are beginning stages or “tender insight”, taruùa vipassanå. They precede the 
first stage of principal insight, which is followed by other stages, until enlightenment is attained. This will be 
further explained in Letter 6. 

----------------------- Page 29-----------------------

                                           29 

“Life is just the flux of realities. Without studying the details about realities it is 
very difficult to become detached from the object which is experienced. 
Detachment is most helpful. Forgetting about labelling the objects is another 
stepping-stone which has to be taken and this is difficult.” 

Life exists only in a moment. When we consider this more we shall be less 
inclined to cling to the concept of a person. When we cling to someone or dislike 
someone it is only thinking. We always think of people, but when there is 
awareness we know whether we think with kusala citta or with akusala citta, 
with loving kindness or with aversion. Khun Sujin said: 

“When we have aversion we should find out whether it is a name or a reality 
which is the object of aversion. A name represents a person. When you think of a 
name you think of someone. Right understanding can find out that it is thinking 
again. One lives with one's own thoughts. Develop loving kindness instead of 
having aversion towards what is only a name.” 

When we understand that a person, in the ultimate sense, exists only in our 
thoughts, we can appreciate the following reminder: 

“What we consider as a friend in conventional terms is only an idea. When you 
have a friend what does it mean? About what do you talk? ‘What shall we do 
tomorrow, where are we going, what shall we eat?’ Thus it means that you 
associate with someone's opinion which you consider as a friend. These are 
moments of thinking. We may associate with wrong opinions or with right 
opinions and that influences our way of life.” 

Khun Sujin also spoke to Alan about married life: 

----------------------- Page 30-----------------------

                                          30 

“We are attached to many things in life but we know that it is for a very short 
time. You can change your mind. One will be married or single according to 
one's accumulations. But don't forget the development of understanding. You 
should not think that your attachment to a person will last as long as you live. 
Every moment arises because of conditions. There can be a change in the 
relationship because of your own accumulations or because of the other person's 
accumulations. Attachment brings sorrow, no matter it lasts long or short. If one 
really studies one's cittas one can understand that there are many degrees of 
attachment. Sometimes one wants something so much for oneself, even if one 
likes the other person. You are attached to that person but you want something 
for yourself. If we study our life closely we just love ourselves. Everything is just 
for the sake of our own feeling, our own pleasure. Nothing is permanent. This 
helps us to see the true nature of reality. We can gain something from each 
moment, even when there is a loss. Even a loss does not bring me much pain, I 
get something from it. It is good if one is prepared, ready to face any unpleasant 
situation. The understanding of the Dhamma can help one in many situations 
about which one would otherwise feel unhappy.” 

Alan asked Khun Sujin: 

“Should one in daily life not be very careful so that one is not caught up with 
pleasant things, non-Dhamma things?” 

Khun Sujin answered: 

“I think one cannot live without pleasure, and one cannot live without Dhamma. 
One cannot live with ignorance, having just pleasure. The wise person cannot 
live just for pleasure. He will live with pleasure and with understanding.” 

This is the Middle Way. If we are honest we know that we have accumulations 
for enjoyment, why deny it? But understanding can develop naturally, of all 

----------------------- Page 31-----------------------

                                          31 

realities which appear, also of pleasure. We do not have to wait or change 
conditions. The Middle Way is the right way, but it is difficult. Progress is bound 
to be slow and because of desire one may try to flee from daily life, try to exert 
effort and concentrate on realities. Khun Sujin spoke again and again about 
natural awareness. She said: 

“When one enjoys something very much one cannot prevent it, but by being 
aware there can be right understanding. That is the eightfold Path. One should 
understand all conditioned realities which occur in one's life. Seeing is 
conditioned, pleasant feeling and unpleasant feeling are conditioned. They have 
their own conditions already. We should not ‘prepare’ conditions for anything to 
arise. When one develops more the eightfold Path one can see how intricate and 
subtleits development is. Sati and paññå can follow the realities appearing 
through all doorways until there is no doubt about conditioned realities. Nobody 
can condition any reality at all. When there is sati with a very low level of 
understanding, begin again, begin again. When one has precise understanding of 
the Middle Way, one will not turn away. One can easily turn away because of 
lobha.” 

When one hears about natural awareness in the midst ofenjoyment, one may 
wonder where the right effort of the eightfold Path comes in. It comes in exactly 
when we begin again, begin again. When we are not disheartened about our low 
level of understanding and there is courage for sati and paññå now, there is right 
effort accompanying right understanding, even though we are only in a 
beginning stage of developing the eightfold Path. We do not have to think of 
making an effort, then there would be an idea of self who exerts effort. We 
should not forget that sati without the development of understanding is not very 
helpful. Understanding of the flux of realities which is our life is the goal. 

******* 

----------------------- Page 32-----------------------

                                                                            32 

----------------------- Page 33-----------------------

                                                33 

Letter about Vipassanå3 

Through the study of the Dhamma we learn that we are misled by the outer 
appearance of things. As soon as we open our eyes it seems that we see 
continuously. Even when there is thinking or hearing it seems that there can still 
be seeing at the same time. More than one experience at a time seems to occur, 
but in reality only one citta at a time arises, experiences an object through the 
appropriate doorway,and then falls away. We may believe that our body can feel 
pleasant and unpleasant things, but in reality the body consists of rúpas, physical 
phenomena, which cannot experience anything. The more we study the Dhamma 
the more we realize that we have accumulated wrong ideas about the 
phenomena in ourselves and around ourselves. Should we not find out more 
about the realities of our life? 

We understand in theory that there is no self, but understanding has not been 
developed to the stage that the truth of anattå, not self, can be directly realized. 
At this moment we are full of the idea of self and our clinging to the self is 
bound to hinder the development of right understanding. We cling to "our 
kusala" and we have aversion towards "our akusala", we do not see these realities 
as they are, as not self. Are we not annoyed when there is disturbance of mind, 
forgetfulness and distraction in a day? Then we have aversion towards "our 
akusala". We wish to improve the situation and become calm, undisturbed and 
mindful, in order to accumulate a great deal of kusala, "our kusala". Instead of 
right understanding of realities which arise because of their own conditions our 
goal becomes the accumulation of kusala. Then we are moving away from our 
real goal: detachment from the self through right understanding. 

Alan Driver, a Dhamma friend who passed away, clearly understood that we can 

                                                                                      2 
easily be moved away from our real goal. I shall quote from his words   : 

“So very often our aim is not really to understand whatever appears right now. 
We want to get rid of distraction, to be calmer, to be steadier, to be more 
organised, to be somehow other than we are. What is that if it is not attachment? 

2  Taken from "Be here now", Adelaid. 

----------------------- Page 34-----------------------

                                           34 

 Why can't we just be aware of distraction? But, oh no, we don't like distraction 
and there we are, thoroughly distracted fromawareness, because of our 
attachment to a self who does not want to be distracted. In fact, this is 
attachment to peace, not the development of understanding. 

Ask yourself, do you really want to be aware or do you want calm? We just go on 
perpetuating the illusion of a self who has got a job to do and who wants to do it 
and does not like distraction which gets in the way of doing the job. That is not 
right understanding at all. It is a cause for more frustration when distraction 
arises. When there is satipaììhåna you are not thrown off balance by distraction. 
You are just aware and then there can be awareness of what appears next. There 
can be awareness and right understanding of what has already appeared by 
conditions, which is not self. Only for one moment though. And then there may 
be a whole lot of distraction. We can't do anything about it, it is anattå. If there is 
awareness at that moment something has been done al ready. It is anattå. 

Developing awareness. I don't think it is what we really want to do at all. We 
don't have the inclination, deep down we are not really interested very often. 
Only at a moment of right understanding is there any interest, right interest in 
the object that appears, in order to see it as it really is. We are always looking for 
some other object, trying to change it or make it last. That is attachment, not 
detachment." 

If we are honest with ourselves we shall notice when we are diverted from the 
right Path in choosing another goal, such as the gaining of kusala for ourselves. I 
am grateful for being reminded of the true goal. There should be detachment 
from the very beginning. When there is a moment of awareness of realities such 
as hardness or sound, are we pleased? Do we cling to "my awareness"? We 
should not be concerned about having awareness, our foremost goal is 
developing understanding. When heat appears it can be known as rúpa, a reality 
which does not experience anything. It is not part of "my body", it is not "mine". 
We never know what reality will appear next, a reality which is pleasant, 
unpleasant, kusala or akusala. If we try to direct sati to this object first and then 
to that, for example to rúpas appearing in the body or to feelings, there is again 
an idea of self and we shall never understand that sati is anattå. 

----------------------- Page 35-----------------------

                                          35 

Someone wrote that a teacher in a meditation center told people to get rid of 
akusala as soon as possible. When it arises one should concentrate more deeply 
on particular realities such as feelings. He also said that one burns up old kamma 
by the accumulation of kusala cittas while one is practising vipassanå. 

Akusala kamma is past already and we cannot prevent it from producing its 
result. The ariyan who has attained enlightenment has no more conditions for an 
unhappy rebirth, but he still receives unpleasant results through the senses in the 
course of his life. We cannot know which kamma produces which result at a 
particular moment, only a Buddha can know this. There were countless lives in 
the past with countless akusala kammas. Who can claim that he can accumulate 
a great deal of kusala and can burn up old kamma? When we are having such 
thoughts we are clinging to the accumulation of kusala, we are again off the 
right Path. 

When akusala citta arises and paññå can realize it as a conditioned nåma there is 
at that moment kusala citta instead of akusala citta. However, this will not be 
achieved by striving to have strong concentration on particular objects one 
selects. There will be more detachment from the self if one does not sit down in 
order to concentrate on particular nåmas and rúpas and if one does not “plan” to 
have mindfulness. It depends on conditions whether there will be sati and paññå 
or not. It depends on conditions what will be the object of paññå, it may be 
akusala citta or any other object. If we believe that by means of satipaììhåna a 
great deal of kusala has been accumulated already, so much so that akusala can 
be burnt up, we do not know ourselves. Do we realize the countless moments of 
subtle clinging or of ignorance, arising time and again after there has been 
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting or the experience of tangible object? Do we 
know whether there is at this moment kusala citta or akusala citta after seeing? 

People who have practised in a center find it difficult to develop satipaììhåna in 
daily life, they find daily life distracting. One should check what one's goal is, 
understanding realities or being calm and free from disturbances? Daily life can 
be the measure of our understanding. When paññå is truly paññå it can 
understand as it is seeing occurring now, hearing occurring now, it can 
understand them naturally, in daily life. Paññå does not develop rapidly or 
suddenly. We cannot determine that from now on paññå should clearly 

----------------------- Page 36-----------------------

                                           36 

understand realities. Paññå develops when it discerns the dhamma which 
appears naturally, in whatever situation or place one may be. We may believe 
that it is difficult to be aware of realities while we are working, but the situation 
of our work is daily life and any reality which appears can be the object of 
mindfulness. Alan Weller wrote: 

“I do not separate Dhamma from work. I think that one sentence concerning the 
Dhamma, spoken by Alan Driver, can be applied and be of value in the work 
situation: ‘We know from our own lives that we do not always give help when 
help is needed.’ This can encourage us not to be neglectful of kusala in our work 
situation. Another phrase to be remembered: ‘This moment should not be lost’. 
This can be a reminder not to be absorbed in work with akusala citta. When we 
understand that this moment should not be lost we don't have to think first or 
reflect first in order to be aware. Thus, understanding can be applied in whatever 
situation, at different levels too: at the levels of síla, of calm and of insight. 

There is no self who can cause the arising of any reality. We have to be so very 
patient to let understanding arise by conditions and forget the trying and the 
wishing for results.” 

This moment should not be lost. We acquire from the scriptures many valuable 
reminders to develop understanding of nåma and rúpa. It is right understanding 
which should be emphasized, not concentration or effort. When understanding 
develops naturally, in daily life, there are also concentration and effort or energy 
accompanying paññå, they are cetasikas which perform their own functions. If 
we think of concentration and effort there can easily be attachment, or, when we 
worry about lack of concentration, there is aversion. 

Someone asked Khun Sujin whether he would have to stop reading in order to be 
aware of different realities. He was wondering how paññå could know different 
realities while he was reading. Khun Sujin asked him whether during the time he 
was paying respect to the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha and reciting the 
Påli texts, he could, in between, also think of other things. There can be many 
moments of ignorance in between, thus, ignorance can arise extremely rapidly. 

----------------------- Page 37-----------------------

                                                   37 

Evenso when paññå has been developed it is extremely fast. We underestimate 
the power of paññå. Paññå is different from what we think it is. We are full of 
the idea of self and thus we imagine that paññå can only know something if we 
first focus on it and exert effort. We may think that it is not possible for paññå to 

                                                                                              3 
know the difference between sense-door process and mind-door process  , since 
the different processes of citta run extremely fast. However, it can be known by 
paññå. It is known by paññå at the first stage of "tenderinsight" which is the 
beginning stage. Or we may mistakenly think that there cannot be sati and 
paññå in a sense-door process. Also in sense-door processes there are conditions 
for akusala cittas or kusala cittas. When there are kusala cittas they can be 
accompanied by paññå or unaccompanied by paññå, depending on conditions. 
Nobody can tell paññå to arise or not to arise, nobody can predict the object of 
paññå. When it arises it performs its function of understanding. 

The paññå which is vipassanå of the first stage of "tender insight" clearly knows 
rúpa as rúpa and nåma as nåma, and it knows this through the mind-door. It is 
useful to know more about this stage of insight, because then we shall realize 
what should be known and what we do not know yet. 

The rúpas which are the different sense objects are experienced through their 
corresponding sense-doors and then through the mind-door. We may have 
doubts about this. We may believe that through the mind-door there can only be 
thinking about concepts and not the experience of rúpas. We read in the 
"Atthasåliní " (I, part II, Analysis of Terms, 72-74) that sense objects are 
experienced through the senses and then through the mind-door. We read about 

                      4 
the javana cittas   arising in a sense-door process and then in the mind-door 
process: 

.... Thus the javana cittas experiencing visible object arise at the eye-door and 
also at the mind-door. The same is the case with the javana cittas experiencing 
sound and the other sense objects.... 

3 See Intro. 
4 Kusala cittas or akusala  cittas arising in the sense-door process and in the mind-door process. The javana cittas 

of the arahat are kiriyacittas, “inoperative” cittas. 

----------------------- Page 38-----------------------

                                                38 

The "Atthasåliní" states in the section on rúpa (II, Book II,Rúpa, the four Great 
Essentials, 304) that the cognition through the mind-door "falls into the stream 
of the fivefold cognition and goes along with it." The mind-door process which 
succeeds the sense-door process falls into its stream since cittas succeed one 
another very rapidly. The rúpa is experienced through the sense-door and then 
through the mind-door. When it is experienced through the mind-door it has 
only just fallen away. During other mind-door processes cittas can have as object 
a concept, such as the shape and form of something. 

The eye-door process, the ear-door process and the other sense-door processes 

                                                                                         5 
are each followed by a mind-door process, but there are bhavanga-cittas   in 
between the processes. Now, at this moment, the different sense-doors are mixed 
up, they do not seem to be demarcated by a mind-door process. It seems that 
seeing does not fall away and that there can be hearing or the experience of 
tangible object at the same time. This shows us that processes of citta succeed 
one another very rapidly. The mind-door is hidden at this moment, it is hidden 
by the sense-doors. In order to remind us of what we do not know yet Khun 
Sujin said: "One door is bright, the other doors are dark." Only when there is 
seeing the world is bright. But now it seems that the world keeps on being 
bright. There seems to be seeing continuously. 

At this moment we know in theory that nåma is the element which experiences 
and that rúpa is the element which does not experience anything. However, 
when there is, for example, the experience of heat through the bodysense it is 
difficult to distinguish nåma from rúpa. There can be awareness of only one 
object at a time, either a nåma or a rúpa, and at that moment there is not "my 
body". When we think of "bodily sensations" we think of a "whole" and we are 
thoroughly mixing up nåma and rúpa. Then we shall continue to cling to a "self". 

In the beginning the understanding of nåma and rúpa is bound to be vague and 
there may be awareness of only a few nåmas and rúpas. It depends on the 
accumulations of the individual through which doors there is awareness. Even 
when the first stage of vipassanå ñåùa, insight knowledge, has been reached 
there may not be clear understanding of many kinds of realities. However, when 

5 Lifecontinuum. Cittas which arise in between processes and which keep the continuity in life. They are 

different from the cittas arising in processes which experience objects impinging on the six doors. 

----------------------- Page 39-----------------------

                                         39 

that stage arises there is no more doubt about the characteristic of nåma and 
about the characteristic of rúpa, both of which at those momentsappear, one at a 
time, through the mind-door. Then there is direct understanding of nåma and 
rúpa. After this stage has been reached one must continue to be mindful and 
develop understanding of all kinds of realities which appear through the six 
doors. Khun Sujin said: 

“The characteristic of nåma can only clearly appear when the mind-door appears. 
At the moment of the first vipassanå ñåùa paññåknows the characteristic of 
nåma and the characteristic of rúpa. Rúpa is not different from rúpa which 
usually appears through the sense-door. Visible object appears through the mind- 
door just as naturally as when we see now, but at that moment it is not 
experienced through the eye-door but through the mind-door.” 

During a trip in the North of Thailand Alan Driver asked Khun Sujin some 
questions about the first stage of insight, vipassanå ñåùa, and I shall quote the 
conversation: 

Alan: “Does visible object appear to be the same through the mind-door as 
through the eye-door, or does it appear differently at the moment of the first 
vipassanå ñåùa?” 

Khun Sujin: “It is the same, exactly the same”. 

 Alan: “In that case how can one know the difference between seeing and the 
experience of visible object through the mind-door?” 

Khun Sujin: “Now there are sense-door processes, and mind-door processes do 
not appear. When the mind-door appears in the case of vipassanå ñåùa it is 
different from just now. “ 

Khun Sujin explained that at this moment sound is experienced through the 
ear-door and after that through the mind-door, butthat we do not realize that 

----------------------- Page 40-----------------------

                                         40 

sound is also experienced through the mind-door. The ear-door process “covers 
up” the function of the mind-door process of cittas in which process the sound is 
also “heard”. Cittas arise and fall away, succeeding one another extremely 
rapidly. Also in the case of the other sense objects an object is experienced 
through the relevant sense-door and then through the mind-door. We are 
confused with regard to the different doorways, it seems that we can see and 
hear at the same time; we do not notice that there are different sense-door 
processes and that each sense-door process is followed by a mind-door process. 

Khun Sujin remarked that at the moments of vipassanå ñåùa the sense objects 
appear and are understood only through the mind-door. When at those moments 
the mind-door appears it is as if none of the sense-doors is appearing. Thus, the 
situation is different from this moment when the mind-door is “covered up” by 
the sense-doors. At the moments of vipassanå ñåùa sense objects are known one 
at a time and these appear only through the mind-door. But this does not mean 
that there are no sense-door processes, otherwise rúpas such as sound could not 
appear. Sound is experienced through the ear-door and extremely rapidly after 
that through the mind-door. In the case of vipassanå ñåùa, it is experienced by 
paññå in a mind-door process and realized as it is, as rúpa. 

Khun Sujin said: “One rúpa at a time and one nåma at a time appears and is 
understood through the mind-door. The world does not appear, there is no self, 
there is nothing else but nåma and rúpa which appear one at a time. At the 
moments of vipassanå ñåùa there is no more doubt about the mind-door.” 

When we hear a sound at this moment we have a vague knowledge of the 
characteristic of sound, but nåma and rúpa and all the doorways are mixed up. 
Whereas when there is the first vipassanå ñåùa the difference between nåma and 
rúpa is directly understood. Paññå clearly knows this, it does not have to think or 
consider. 

Is there doubt about the mind-door? Does nåma clearly appear as an element 
which experiences something? When we realize what we do not know yet we 
shall not erroneously believe that we canhave direct understanding of the arising 
and falling away of nåma and rúpa. This can only be realized at a later stage. 

----------------------- Page 41-----------------------

                                         41 

First paññå must be developed to the stage that it can clearly distinguish 
between the different characteristics of nåma and of rúpa. 

We should be grateful to the Buddha for teaching us about all realities which 
naturally appear in daily life. Thus we are able to test the truth of what he 
taught. He taught that each reality arises because of its own conditions. For 
example, if there were no eyesense and visible object, seeing-consciousness could 
not arise. Eyesense and visible object are necessary conditions for seeing. The 
eyesense is the rúpa which is the physical base or place of origin for seeing- 
consciousness. Seeing arises at that base. Hearing-consciousness arises at the 
ear-base and each of the other sense-cognitions have their corresponding base. 
The rúpas which are bases (vatthus) arise and fall away, they do not last. The 
base for body-consciousness can be at any point of the body, inside or on the 
outside. When we think of "body sensitivity" we still have an idea that the body 
itself can experience something. The bodysense is the base for body- 
consciousness and also for the accompanying bodily feeling which can be painful 
or pleasant. We dislike pain and we attach great importance to bodily wellbeing. 
When we know what exactly the bodysense is it will help us to have less 
confusion about nåma and rúpa. 

The word body sensitivity can mislead us, the bodysense cannot experience 
anything. It can be a condition for the experience of tangibile object, of softness, 
hardness, heat, cold, motion or pressure. There can be impingement only by one 
of these rúpas on one extremely small point of the body at a time, and then 
body-consciousness experiences that object just for a moment. That point of the 
body is then the body-base and the body-door, but it falls away immediately. 
When a characteristic of rúpa is experienced, such as heat, impinging on the 
rúpa which is then body-base, nothing else can at that moment appear at other 
parts of the body. These parts are as it were completely numb, they cannot be 
the base for body-consciousness and bodily feeling. Neither can seeing or hearing 
arise at the same time, since only one citta arises at a time experiencing one 
object. 

My husband pushed one hand on his shoulder and one hand on his waist, and he 
thought that hardness could be experienced on two points at the same time. 
When we only think of the body as a whole and there is no awareness of one 

----------------------- Page 42-----------------------

                                          42 

object at a time, we shall not know the truth. We are misled by saññå, the 
cetasika which is remembrance. When saññå remembers wrongly, not according 
to the truth, it seems that there is "my whole body". All the rúpas of the body 
arise and then fall away immediately, never to come back again. Since we hold 
on to memories of what has been experienced and has fallen away already we do 
not know the truth. There may be "attå saññå", wrong remembrance of self, and 
"niccå saññå", wrong remembrance of things as permanent. Do we still think that 
the whole hand can "feel"something? Then there is wrong saññå. Because of 
association of different experiences in the past, also in the recent past, we form 
up the idea of a hand which feels something. 

In the Commentary to the “Book of Analysis” (the "Vibhaòga", the Second Book 
of the Abhidhamma), in the "Dispeller of Delusion" (Sammohavinodaní , 
Classification of the Khandhas) it is explained that saññå is like a mirage which 
deceives us: 

 Perception, saññå, also is like a mirage in the sense of being unsubtantial, and 
likewise in the sense of being ungraspable. For one cannot grasp it and drink it 
or wash in it or bathe in it or fill a pot with it. Furthermore, just as a mirage 
quivers and seems like the movement of waves, so indeed perception also, 
divided up as perception of blue, etc. for the purpose of experiencing blue, etc., 
shakes and quivers. And just as a mirage deceives many and makes them say: 
"This is blue, beautiful, pleasant, permanent." So too in the case of yellow and so 
on. Thus it is like a mirage by deception also. 

We may not have considered to what extent wrong saññåinfluences our whole 
life. We are misled by the outer appearance of things. When children play with 
dolls and toy animals they live in their own dream world which they take very 
seriously. When a toy is broken or is lost they cry. Is it not pitiful that we do not 
really grow up, but keep on playing in our dream world? Because of saññåwhich 
remembers wrongly we hold on to all objects which are experienced. We have a 
short happy time with the five khandhas which arise, are present for an 
extremely short time and then fall away. We cry about our losses. 

----------------------- Page 43-----------------------

                                         43 

We can begin to be mindful of different characteristics of nåma and rúpa, this 
moment should not be lost. The study of the Abhidhamma helps a great deal to 
eliminate misunderstandings about different nåmas and rúpas. When for 
example hardness appears that characteristic can be known as rúpa, not self. We 
should not try to catch the place which is the body-base at a particular moment. 
Then there is thinking instead of awareness of the reality which appears. The 
rúpa which is body-base cannot be experienced through touch, it can only be 
experienced through the mind-door. This rúpa falls away immediately. 

We read in the scriptures that realities are not self, anattå, but anattåmay only be 
a word to us. Does the reality which is not self appear already through eyes, ears, 
nose, tongue, bodysense and mind-door? If we still confuse the different 
doorways it seems that people, houses and trees appear, and they seem to be 
real. Seeing is one experience and it experiences only colour, it has nothing to do 
with hearing or the experience of tangible object. It is only when paññåhas been 
developed to the degree of the first vipassanå ñåùa that no world, no person, no 
self appears, only nåma and rúpa. 

 When the different objects experienced through the six doors are not clearly 
separated we tend to think for a long time about what is not real. The object is 
then a concept. We are obsessed by our thoughts and we cling to them, and thus 
there are still conditions for rebirth. The arahat also thinks of concepts, but he 
has no defilements, for him there are no conditions for rebirth. We read in the 
"Kindred Sayings" (II, Nidåna vagga, Kindred Sayings on Cause, Ch IV, § 40, 
Will), that the Buddha, while he was at Såvatthí , said to the monks: 

That which we will, monks, and that which we intend to do, and that with which 
we are occupied: - this becomes an object for the persistence of consciousness. 
The object, being there, becomes a basis for consciousness. Consciousness being 
based and having grown, there comes a bending; there being a bending, there is 
a going to a coming; there being a going to a coming, there is decease and 
rebirth; there being decease and rebirth, birth, old age and death happen in the 
future, and grief, lamentation, suffering, sorrow and despair. Even such is the 
entire mass of dukkha. 

----------------------- Page 44-----------------------

                                        44 

This happens also if we do not will, or intend to do, but are occupied about 
something. 

But if we do not will, nor intend to do, nor are occupied about something, these 
things do not happen. Even such is the ceasing of this entire mass of dukkha. 

This sutta is about daily life. Time and again we are absorbed in our thinking 
and planning and there is forgetfulness of realities. We plan what we are going 
to do today or tomorrow. However, if there were no citta which thinks we could 
not plan anything. If we remember this there can be conditions for awareness of 
the citta which thinks and it can be known as a conditioned nåma. At that 
moment we are not obsessed by our thinking. There will be thinking again and 
again because there are conditions for it, but through awareness and right 
understanding it can be known as anattå. 

 ************ 

----------------------- Page 45-----------------------

                                         45 

Letter about Vipassanå 4 

We read in the "Kindred Sayings" (I,Sagåthå vagga, Ch IV, Måra, 2, par. 7, The 
Sphere of Sense) that the Buddha taught the monks about the six spheres of 
contact. Måra wanted to confuse the monks and therefore he made a terrible 
noise so that they thought that the earth was splitting open. The Buddha told the 
monks that it was only Måra. He addressed Måra in a verse: 

Sights, sounds, and tastes and smells and tangibles, 

 All sense impressions and mental objects, 

These are the direful bait that draws the world; 

Herein the world infatuated lies. 

All this if he get past and leave behind, 

The Buddha's follower, with heedful mind, 

Passing beyond the range of Måra's might, 

Like the high sun fills the world with light. 

We then read that Måra was sad and disappeared. 

We are engrossed in the sense objects, but through the development of right 
understanding we can pass beyond the range of Måra. According to the 
commentary to this sutta , the "Saratthappakåsiní" (Thai edition p. 329), the 
range of Måra are the three classes of planes where one can be reborn: the 
sensuous planes, the rúpa-brahma planes and the arúpa-brahma planes. When 
there is no more rebirth one escapes the snare of Måra. 

We are born in the human plane which is a sensuous plane. Our birth in the 
human plane is conditioned by kusala kamma performed by cittas of the sense 
sphere, kåmåvacara cittas. In the human plane there are opportunities time and 
again to experience sense objects. We are engrossed in all the sense objects and 
we keep on thinking about them. All these objects can only appear because there 

----------------------- Page 46-----------------------

                                          46 

are cittas arising in processes which experience objects through the six doors. We 
may have learnt this through the study of the Abhidhamma but since we are so 
absorbed in the objects themselves we forget to consider citta, the reality which 
experiences them. The Abhidhamma teaches us about daily life and thus the 
study of it can motivate us to find out more about all realities which occur in our 
daily life. The Abhidhamma can be a supporting condition for the arising of sati, 
mindfulness, which is directly aware of realities which appear. 

When visible object impinges on the eyesense there are conditions for seeing, but 
visible object appears only for an extremely short moment. It is the same with 
sound and the other sense objects, they are all insignificant dhammas, they 
appear just for a short moment and then they fall away. Also the cittas which 
arise in the different sense-door processes and experience the objects fall away 
very rapidly. Cittas arise and fall away but each citta is succeeded by the next 
citta and thus it seems that citta can stay. After the experience of visible object, 
sound and the other sense objects, we form up concepts on account of these 
objects. Our world seems to be full of people and things and we keep on thinking 
about them. We are quite occupied with thinking and we take our thoughts very 
seriously. However, thinking only occurs because citta arises, thinks about 
something and then falls away. 

Each citta experiences an object, and the object can be an absolute or ultimate 
reality, a nåma or rúpa, or a concept. We cannot predict which object will 
impinge the next moment on which doorway. Visible object, sound or the other 
sense objects can be pleasant or unpleasant. The experience of pleasant sense 
objects or unpleasant sense objects is vipåkacitta which is conditioned by kusala 
kamma or akusala kamma performed in the past. There isn't anybody who can 
control vipåka.Vipåkacittas just experience the pleasant sense object or the 
unpleasant sense object, they do not like or dislike it. When there is like or 
dislike there are already akusala cittas arising. After the moments of vipåkacittas 
there are, in the case of non-arahats, seven akusala cittas or kusala cittas which 
experience the object. When akusala cittas arise there is unwise attention to the 
object and when kusala cittas arise there is wise attention to the object. 

We can notice that we all have different inclinations and these are conditioned 
by what has been accumulated in the past. Kusala citta and akusala citta arise 

----------------------- Page 47-----------------------

                                          47 

and then fall away, but the succeeeding citta carries on the inclination to kusala 
or to akusala and thus there are conditions for the arising of kusala citta or 
akusala citta later on. Kusala citta and akusala citta of the past condition the 
arising of kusala citta and akusala citta at the present, and the arising of kusala 
citta and akusala citta at the present are in their turn conditions for the cittas 
arising in the future. 

If our reactions today are conditioned by past accumulations it may seem that a 
fate reigns our life. Someone was wondering whether there is no possibility to 
control one's inclinations, to exert effort for the development of kusala. The 
inclinations which have been accumulated in the past condition cittas which 
arise today but this does not mean that inclinations cannot be changed. If we 
listen to the Dhamma as it is explained by the right friend in the Dhamma, and if 
we study the Dhamma and consider it carefully , conditions are being built up for 
the arising of sati. Sati can be directly aware of realities as they appear in our 
daily life and then right understanding can be developed. Right understanding 
must be developed from life to life but there is no self who develops it. The 
development ofunderstanding depends on conditions. If there were no 
conditions how could it arise and develop? We are used to an idea of self who 
can exert effort but there is no one. We read in the "Visuddhimagga" (XVI,90) : 

Mere suffering exists, no sufferer is found; 

The deeds are, but no doer of the deeds is there; 

Nibbåna is, but not the man who attains it; 

Although there is a path, there is no goer. 

There is a path and it can be developed but there is no self who can develop it. If 
there is no development of right understanding we are tied down to all the sense 
objects, we are tied down to the cycle of birth and death. We read in the 
"Kindred Sayings" (III, Khandha vagga, Middle Fifty, Ch V, par. 99, The Leash) 
that the Buddha said at Såvatthí: 

----------------------- Page 48-----------------------

                                            48 

Just as, monks, a dog tied up by a leash to a strong stake or pillar, keeps running 
round and revolving round and round that stake or pillar, evenso, monks, the 
untaught manyfolk... regard body as self, regard feeling, perception, activities, 
consciousness as self... they runand revolve round and round from body to body, 
fromfeeling to feeling, from perception to perception, from activities to activities, 
from consciousness toconsciousness... they are not released therefrom, they 
arenot released from rebirth, from old age and decay, fromsorrow and grief, 
from woe, lamentation and despair...they are not released from dukkha, I 
declare... 

We then read that the ariyan disciple who does not take any reality for self is 
released from dukkha. In the following sutta, "The Leash" II, we read again about 
the simile of the dog which is tied: 

Just like a dog, monks, tied up by a leash to a strongstake or pillar- if he goes, he 
goes up to that stake or pillar; if he stands still, he stands close to that stake or 
pillar; if he squats down, he squats close to thatstake or pillar; if he lies down, he 
lies close to that stake or pillar. 

Those who take the five khandhas for self are like that dog which is tied down. 
They are always close to the five khandhas, they are tied down to it. A dog tied 
to a pole, which runs around it and always has to stay close to it, is a pitiful 
sight. So long as we take the khandhas for self we are not free. Through the 
development of satipaììhåna the idea of self can be eradicated. 

The Buddha taught the four "Applications of Mindfulness": mindfulness of body, 
of feelings, of cittas and of dhammas. Some people think that they should select 
one of these subjects, such as body or feelings, and only develop these. However, 
there should be awareness of any object which appears. If we try to select an 
object there is an idea of self who can control the appearance of particular 
objects. It depends on conditions whether visible object, sound, akusala citta or 
any other object appears. Sati can be aware of any object just as it naturally 
appears in our daily life. We do not have to make an effort to classify the object 

----------------------- Page 49-----------------------

                                          49 

of awareness as one of the four Applications of Mindfulness. At one moment 
there may be awareness of rúpa, the next moment there may be awareness of 
citta or feeling, nobody can predict of which object there will be awareness. We 
should learn that all realities are anattå, they cannot be directed by a self. 

The Buddha taught the four Applications of Mindfulness in order to remind us to 
be aware of different kinds of nåma and rúpa as they naturally appear in our 
daily life. We read in the "Kindred Sayings"(V, Mahå-vagga, Book III, Kindred 
Sayings on the Applications of Mindfulness, Ch V, par. 9, Feelings) that the 
Buddha said, while he was at Såvatthí: 

Monks, there are these three feelings. What three? Feeling that is pleasant, 
feeling that is painful, feeling that is neither pleasant nor painful. These are the 
three feelings. 

For the full understanding of these three feelings thefour applications of 
mindfulness ought to be cultivated... 

The four applications of mindfulness are cultivated by awareness of all kinds of 
nåma and rúpa which appear; there should not be mindfulness of only feeling. 

We read in the "Kindred Sayings"(V, Kindred Sayings on the Way, Ch VII, par. 9, 
Feelings) that the Buddha said, while he was at Såvatthí: 

Monks, there are these three feelings. What three? Feeling that is pleasant, 
feeling that is painful, feeling that is neither pleasant nor painful. These are the 
three. It is for the full comprehension of these three feelings that the ariyan 
eightfold Path must be cultivated. 

Feeling is nåma, it feels, thus it is different from rúpa which does not know 
anything. The difference between nåma and rúpa has to be clearly discerned 
before paññå can realize realities as impermanent, dukkha and anattå. In order 

----------------------- Page 50-----------------------

                                        50 

to fully understand feeling there must be awareness of the characteristics of all 
the different kinds of nåma and rúpa which appear in daily life. Then right 
understanding of realities can grow. That is the development of the "Four 
Applications of Mindfulness" or satipaììhåna, and that is the development of the 
eightfold Path. We do not have to think of classifications while we develop the 
Path in being aware of any object which appears. 

Do we know feelings as they are? Feelings change all the time since they arise 
and fall away together with the citta they accompany. We may be aware of 
pleasant feeling or unpleasant feeling, but we should also know the characteristic 
of indifferent feeling. When there is seeing the accompanying feeling is 
indifferent feeling, there cannot be pleasant feeling or unpleasant feeling. When 
we feel pain we are inclined to think that pain lasts. We think in this way 
because we do not realize the different characteristics of realities which appear. 
When there is impact of tangible object such as hardness on the bodysense there 
can be conditions for painful feeling. Painful feeling accompanying body- 
consciousness which is vipåkacitta only arises for one moment and then it falls 
away together with the citta. Tangible object which impinges on the bodysense 
falls away and so does the rúpa which is the bodysense on which the tangible 
object impinges. We tend to forget that the bodysense on which tangible object 
impinges is only an extremely small part of the body, a rúpa which arises and 
then falls away. We keep on thinking of "my sensitive body". Right 
understanding reduces the importance of "my body" or "I". We should "belittle 
ourselves from head to toe". When we remember this we can read with more 
understanding what is written in the suttas about endurance. We read, for 
example, in the "Discourse on all the Cankers" (Middle Length Sayings I, no. 2) 
that the Buddhaspoke about ways to eliminate defilements. We read about 
endurance: 

And what, monks, are the cankers to be got rid of by endurance? In this 
teaching, monks, a monk, wisely reflective, is one who bears cold, heat, hunger, 
thirst, the touch of gadfly, mosquito, wind and sun, creeping things, ways of 
speech that are irksome, unwelcome; he is of a character to bear bodily feelings 
which, arising, are painful, acute, sharp, shooting, disagreeable, miserable, 

----------------------- Page 51-----------------------

                                          51 

deadly... 

When one is wisely reflective one realizes unpleasant experiences as nåmas 
which arise because of their own conditions. Paramattha dhammas, nåma and 
rúpa, fall away immediately, they are insignificant dhammas, they are very 
trivial. We immediately form up concepts on account of paramattha dhammas 
which are experienced and we keep on thinking about concepts for a long time. 

When we pay attention to the shape and form of things we think of concepts, but 
we could not think of shape and form if there were no seeing. Seeing sees colour 
or visible object but there is usually ignorance of these realities. They arise and 
then fall away but they are not known. When one considers realities more often 
there will be more conditions for awareness of them. Someone said that the 
word colour may be misleading, because when one recognizes red or blue there 
is already thinking. However, red or blue are seen without having to label them 
red or blue. These colours are not the same and they appear through the eye- 
door. If there were no eyesense the different colours could not appear. The 
"Dhammasangaùi" (Book II,Ch II, 617) gives many details about colour. Colour 
can be blue, yellow, red, white, black, crimson, bronze, green, of the hue of the 
mango-bud, shady, glowing, light, dim, dull, frosty, smoky or dusty. It can be the 
colour of the moon, sun, stars, a mirror, a gem, a shell, a pearl, a cat's eye, gold 
or silver. The aim of giving so many details is to remind us to be aware of colour, 
no matter it is the colour of the moon, of a gem or any other colour. Satipaììhåna 
can be developed in a natural way. Also when we look at the moon or at gems 
there is colour and it can be known as the reality which can be seen. We do not 
have to make an effort to look for a special colour in order to be aware of it. 

The "Dhammasangaùi" gives in the same section (621) examples of different 
kinds of sounds: 

That sound which is derived from the four great Elements, is invisible and 
reacting, such as the sound of drums, of tabors, of chank-shells, of tom-toms, of 
singing, of music; clashing sounds, manual sounds, the noise of people, the 
sound of the concussion of substances, of wind, of water, sounds human and 

----------------------- Page 52-----------------------

                                                52 

other than human, or whatever sound there is... 

This passage reminds us to be aware of sound, no matter which kind of sound it 
is. Sounds are not the same, they are high or low, loud or soft, they have 
different qualities. We are so used to the familiar sound of the shuffling of feet, 
of the turning of pages or of pen or pencil when we are writing. We let such 
moments pass without awareness. We are usually absorbed in the meaning of 
sounds, thus, in concepts, but we can begin to be aware of the characteristic of 
sound. This is the way to know it as a reality which can be heard. Right 
understanding reduces the importance of the meaning of something, of concepts. 

Patience and perseverance are needed for the development of right 
understanding. Life passes so rapidly, we are advancing in years and we do not 
know what our next life will be like. We do not know whether we shall have the 
opportunity to develop paññå again, and therefore, should we not speed up our 
practice? We all may be inclined to think in this way, but are we aware of such a 
moment of thinking? If we are not mindful of it as a conditioned reality we are 
neglecting the Dhamma, not profiting from the treasures of the teachings in full. 
We are so absorbed in the stories we are thinking of and are forgetful of the 
reality of citta which thinks. Thinking is a reality arising because of conditions, it 
is non-self. 

                   6 
Lokuttara citta   cannot arise all of a sudden, insight has to be developed in 
stages, on and on. It has to be developed just now, not at some other time. 
Defilements are anattå, it is not possible to get rid of them quickly, they arise 
because they have been accumulated for aeons, they are conditioned. They can 
be realized as nåma when they appear. If we get to know them as they are there 
is already a beginning of a cure, paññå does its work. Paññå is the most 
important factor because it is paññå which can eradicate ignorance and wrong 
view. There is no need to think so much of effort, volition and concentration. 
Don't we usually think of effort, volition and concentration with an idea of self 
who wants to exert control? We should carefully examine ourselves as to this 
point because such an ideahindersthe development of right understanding. We 
may not attain enlightenment in this life, but what has been learnt is never lost. 

6 The citta which attains enlightenment and experiences nibbåna. 

----------------------- Page 53-----------------------

                                          53 

It has been accumulated and it can appear in another life. A moment of right 
understanding now, of our natural life, is a precious moment. It is more valuable 
than thinking of the future. 

We read in the sutta "The Sphere of Sense"(Kindred Sayings I) which was quoted 
above, that the Buddha "was instructing, enlightening, inciting and inspiring the 
monks by a sermon on the six spheres of contact". This wording is also used in 
the previous sutta "The Bowl", and there the commentary (the Saratthapakåsiní, 
Thai edition, p. 328) gives an explanation. The Buddha was inciting the monks 
so that they would apply the Dhamma. In this connection the Pali word 
"samådåna" is used, which means undertaking what one considers worth while. 
The Buddha preached to the monks so that they would consider the Dhamma 
and have right understanding. He instructed them so that they would have 
energy (ussaha) and perseverance for the application of the Dhamma. The 
Buddha taught about all the realities of daily life and these can be verified. The 
commentaryexplains that the monks were inspired, gladdened and purified 
because of the benefit they acquired from the Dhamma. 

Khun Sujin writes in her book "A Survey of Paramattha Dhammas" (Citta, Ch 16) 
about this passage in the commentary: 

"... Someone may be unhappy and he may worry about it that he is growing 
older and that sati arises very seldom. When one worries the citta is akusala. We 
should not because of the Dhamma have akusala cittas, we should not be 
worried.The Buddha taught the Dhamma in order that people would be 
encouraged to apply it, develop it with perseverance and be inspired by it. 
Akusala arises when there are conditions , there is no self who can prevent its 
arising.When akusala citta has already arisen, we should not be downhearted, 
but we can take courage if there can be awareness of the characteristic of 
akusala which appears. We should not waste any opportunity to be aware. Then 
we shall know that also akusala dhamma which appears at such a moment is not 
a being, not a person or self. It can be clearly seen that at the moment of 
awareness there is no akusala, no downheartedness. One will not be troubled 
about akusala if one does not take it for self..." 

----------------------- Page 54-----------------------

                                           54 

The monks were inspired and gladdened because of the benefit they acquired 
from the teachings. The Commentary adds: "We all can attain this benefit." We 
can really benefit from the teachings when satipaììhåna is developed.The 
development of satipaììhåna should not make us discouraged. The realities 
which appear can be penetrated and realized as they are. They arise and fall 
away, they are not self, not a being or person. When we consider the great value 
of the truth and know that we can realize it one day, although not today, we 
shall not be disheartened. One should not worry about it that one cannot know 
realities as they are today. Sati can arise and begin to be aware today, and then 
the characteristics of realities will surely one day be wholly penetrated and 
clearly known as they are. 

When we see that the truth of Dhamma is for our benefit and that it can be 
attained, we shall not become discouraged. We shall continue to listen and to 
study the realities the Buddha taught in detail, and then we shall not be forgetful 
of realities, there will be conditions for the arising of sati. 

******************** 

----------------------- Page 55-----------------------

                                               55 

Letter about Vipassanå5 

We are disturbed by aversion, dosa, which often arises in a day and we would 
like to get rid of it. We would like to have more patience in difficult 
circumstances and more loving kindness towards others, but kusala citta does 
not arise very often. 

 If we want to cultivate patience and loving kindness, we should see the 
disadvantage not only of dosa but also of all other kinds of akusala. We find it 
unpleasant to have dosa, but dosa is conditioned by attachment, lobha. Our 
attachment to pleasant objects conditions dosa when we do not get what we 
want. There are many moments of akusala we overlook. We may notice that 
there is akusala citta when we act or speak in an unpleasant way, but there are 
countless moments of thinking which are akusala and these pass unnoticed. In 
which way do we think of others, with kusala citta or with akusala citta? For 
example, when we notice someone who is dressed in a peculiar way we may find 
him funny looking, and there may be conceit. We compare him with ourselves, 
he does not conform to the way we think someone should dress. When there is 
conceit there is no loving kindness. When we are annoyed about something 
which is very unpleasant we know that there is dosa, but we may not notice dosa 
when it is of a lesser degree, for example, when something is not quite as it 
should be. Do we have kusala cittas or akusala cittas when we taste fruit which is 
overripe, when we see that there is a button missing, when we feel a little too 
cold or too hot? We find it very important how the "self" is feeling. We only want 
pleasant objects and we forget that seeing, hearing and the other sense- 
cognitions are produced by kamma. We cannot see kamma, it has been 
committed in the past, but nobody can change the result produced by kamma. If 
we do not accumulate kusala there will be evermore akusala accumulated from 
life to life. 

----------------------- Page 56-----------------------

                                         56 

When we notice that there are so few moments of loving kindness, mettå, in a 
day and so many akusala cittas, we may become discouraged. However, there is 
no self who can prevent the arising of akusala and cause mettå to arise 
immediately. Akusala citta as well as kusala citta are nåmas which arise because 
of their own conditions, they are beyond control. It depends on one's 
accumulated inclinations what type of citta arises at a particular moment. 
Through the study of the Dhamma there will be more understanding of the 
different characteristics of kusala and akusala. The Dhamma is the condition for 
less ignorance in one's life. If we want to develop mettå we must have a precise 
knowledge of its characteristic when it arises. At the moment of mettå one is not 
selfish, one only thinks of the wellbeing of someone else. There is kindness 
without expecting anything in return. 

Lovingkindness is one of the four "Divine Abidings", Brahmavihåras. The other 
Brahmavihåras are: compassion, sympathetic joy and equanimity. These are 
subjects of samatha or tranquil meditation. Through the development of samatha 
there can be temporary freedom from akusala. However, samatha cannot be 
developed without right understanding. Paññå must know the characteristic of 
true calm which is kusala. When we hear the word samatha we may think that 
we have to go into seclusion in order to have concentration and that we should 
recite for example the "mettåsutta". However, the development of mettå is not a 
matter of trying to concentrate or reciting. Mettå must be developed in daily life 
when we are with others; then we can come to know its true characteristic. 
Foremost is right understanding which knows the characteristic of mettå when it 
appears. 

We read in the scriptures about people who developed samatha to the degree of 
jhåna, absorption, but we should know that not everybody is able to attain jhåna. 
People who had accumulated great skill for jhåna could attain different stages of 
jhåna, but, as the "Visuddhimagga" (Ch XII,7) states, jhåna is extremely difficult 
and only very few people can attain it. One has to live in seclusion and many 
conditions have to be fulfilled in order to attain it. At the moments of jhåna there 
are no sense impressions and the "hindrances" are temporarily subdued. The 
"hindrances" are: sensuous desire, ill-will, sloth and torpor, restlessness and 
worry, and doubt. However, through samatha defilements cannot be eradicated. 

----------------------- Page 57-----------------------

                                         57 

Through right understanding developed in vipassanå defilements can be 
eradicated. We think of ourselves and others as persons, we cling to a concept of 
"self", but through vipassanå we learn to see what we really are: only citta, 
cetasika and rúpa which arise and then fall away immediately. When someone 
goes away or dies, we can think of a name, but also a name is forgotten soon. 
We read in the "Sutta Nipåta" (on Decay, vs. 807-809): 

As a man awakened from sleep no longer sees what happenedin his dream, 
similarly one does not see a loved one who is dead. Those people who were seen 
and heard and called bytheir names as such and such, only their names remain 
whenthey have passed away. 

When we are reborn there is another life and we are no longer "this person", but 
also right now there isn't "this person" who exists. We should often consider 
where our body now comes from. We have eyes and ears, but we cannot notice 
what causes eyesense and earsense. It is kamma performed in the past. The 
rúpas which form up our body are conditioned by kamma, citta, temperature and 
food. We are seeing and hearing time and again. Seeing and hearing are cittas 
produced by kamma. They arise and then fall away immediately. When we think 
of other people we usually think of names. We should consider the difference 
between names and paramattha dhammas, absolute realities, nåma and rúpa 
which can be directly experienced without having to name them. We live mostly 
in the world of our thoughts, we keep on thinking of stories about people, about 
their names, about concepts. However, in order to know the truth we should 
learn to be aware of realities as they appear one at a time through eyes, ears, 
nose, tongue, bodysense or mind-door. Then we shall eventually be able to see 
realities as they are: impermanent, dukkha and anattå. When we look at a chair 
it does not seem to fall away. A chair is a concept we can think of, but it is not a 
reality. Only paramattha dhammas have the characteristics of impermanence, 
dukkha and anattå which can be realized by paññå when it has been developed. 

Vipassanåshould be developed in daily life, it is right understanding of all 
realities which are in us and around us. The object of vipassanå are paramattha 

----------------------- Page 58-----------------------

                                            58 

dhammas as they appear one at a time through one of the six doors. The object 
of samatha is one of the meditation subjects and the aim is to have true calm, 
temporary freedom from akusala. Mettå, loving kindness, is an object of 
samatha, but it can and should be developed in daily life. Mettå is directed 
towards a person, thus, its object is not a paramattha dhamma but a concept. 
There are many moments that we think of people and instead of thinking with 
attachment, aversion or conceit, we can learn to think with kindness. Mettå is a 
reality and thus it can be object of mindfulness, it can be known as a kind of 
nåma which is not self. We can develop both vipassanå and mettå in daily life. 
Mettå is one of the "perfections" (paramís) which should be developed together 
with satipaììhåna from life to life. Through the development of mettå we learn to 
be less selfish and thus also mettå is, together with all the other sobhana 
cetasikas which are accumulated, a supporting condition for paññå which can 
eventually eradicatethe wrong view of self. Satipaììhåna conditions mettå to 
arise more often. When there is awareness of the different cittas we learn to 
know their characteristics more clearly, we learn to know when the citta is 
kusala and when akusala. When mettå arises and there is awareness of it we 
shall be less inclined to take it for self. 

Some people think that they should first have calm as a condition for more 
moments of satipaììhåna later on, but that is desire, not mahå-kusala citta 
accompanied by paññå. 

Someone wrote to me that the development of jhåna would be beneficial for the 
development of vipassanå. He wrote: 

"Jhåna can provide a very strong basis of concentrationserving the development 
of insight. Though jhåna is not strictly necessary to develop vipassanå, it can 
prove very effective in suppressing the hindrances and thereby allows the 
development of insight to proceed with special strength and consistency. Jhåna 
fulfills the factor of Right Concentration in the noble eightfold Path." 

The factors of the eightfold Path must be accompanied by right understanding of 
the eightfold Path, and the object must be a nåma or a rúpa. 

----------------------- Page 59-----------------------

                                           59 

The factors of the eightfold Path are cetasikas which each have their own 
function in the development ofright understanding ofparamattha dhammas, of 
the realities appearing right now. When right understanding arises of the reality 
which appears there is also right thinking, vitakka, which assists right 
understanding; it "hits" the object which appears so that paññå can penetrate its 
characteristic and know it as it is. At that moment also right effort arises, which 
is effort or energy to develop understanding of the object which appears; it 
strengthens and supports paññå. The path-factor right mindfulness is aware of 
the nåma or rúpa which appears so that right understanding can develop. Right 
concentration (sammmå-samådhi) is concentration on the paramattha dhamma 
which appears, just for that moment. As to the factors which are síla (morality), 
namely, right action, right speech and right livelihood, they arise one at a time, 
when there is an opportunity for them. When there is a moment of right 
awareness and right understanding the eightfold Path is being developed. One 
can also say, satipaììhåna is being developed, or vipassanå is being developed. It 
is the same. 

The development of the eightfold Path is not a matter of developing 
concentration separated from the other factors of the eightfold Path. When right 
understanding arises of a paramattha dhamma which appears there is already 
right concentration which arises naturally, because of conditions. At that 
moment right understanding is assisted by the other path-factors and there is no 
need to think of path-factors or name them. 

If one encourages people to develop jhåna as a foundation for vipassanåmany 
misunderstandings are bound to arise. People may not know what true calm is, 
they may not know what jhåna is. They do not realize that the objects of 
vipassanåand samatha are different. We read in the Visuddhimagga that jhåna 
can be a base for the development of vipassanå. However, we should stress again 
and again that this can only be so when someone has the five masteries (vasís, 
Vis. XXIII, 227): mastery of adverting and of entering jhåna at any time, at any 
place, resolving on its duration, emerging at any time, at any place and 
reviewing the jhåna-factors, at any time, at any place. Only then the jhånacitta 
can arise so naturally, that it is a reality of one's life and can thus be object of 
awareness. It can be a proximate cause or a base for insight. But even those who 

----------------------- Page 60-----------------------

                                         60 

have such skill cannot omit being aware of paramattha dhammas, nåmas and 
rúpas appearing one at a time. The three characteristics of impermanence, 
dukkha and anattå of nåmas and rúpas have to be realized, no matter one 
develops jhåna or not. 

We often read in the scriptures about people who developed jhåna and insight 
and then attained arahatship. Also before the Buddha's enlightenment people 
developed jhåna. The attainment ofjhåna is not specifically Buddhist, but the 
Buddha taught that one should not take jhånacitta for self. Therefore for those 
who could attain jhåna the jhånacitta should be object of satipaììhåna. The 
Buddha spoke about jhåna because he included everything in his teaching, for 
completeness, for the beautifying of the teaching. He took account of all kinds of 
temperament. 

I have noticed that people are inclined to stress concentration in the practice of 
vipassanå, also when they do not intend to develop jhåna first. They think that 
there must be a purified concentration by suppressing the hindrances first and 
that this would lead to uninterrupted mindfulness. However, defilements should 
be known as they are, as not self, that is the only way leading to their 
eradication. Seeing should be known as only a nåma, and also akusala citta 
which is likely to follow seeing immediately should be known as a kind of nåma. 
Is there not time and again like or dislike of the different objects appearing 
through the six doors? Should these not be known as they are? We should not 
stay ignorant of the akusala arising on account of the objects appearing through 
the six doors. We read in the "Kindred Sayings"(V, Mahåvagga, Kindred Sayings 
on the Way,Ch VIII, par. 7, Hindrances): 

Monks, there are these five hindrances. What five? Thehindrance of sensual 
desire, the hindrance of malevolence, the hindrance of sloth and torpor, the 
hindrance of restlessness and worry and the hindrance of doubt and wavering. 
These are the five hindrances. It is for the full comprehension, realization, 
wearing down and abandoning of these five hindrances that the ariyan eightfold 
Path must be cultivated. 

----------------------- Page 61-----------------------

                                          61 

In the beginning we cannot yet have clear understanding of nåma as nåma and 
of rúpa as rúpa. Beginning is beginning. Generally people cannot accept that, 
they want to stress exertion, volitional control, doing this or that special 
technique first, before developing awareness of nåma and rúpa. Any reality 
appearing in daily life can be the object of satipaììhåna. From the beginning one 
should understand that realities are anattå. Seeing is anattå; it arises because 
kamma produces it, nobody can produce his own seeing. In its train there are 
immediately javana cittas which are either kusala or akusala, but mostly akusala. 
They have already arisen before one realizes it. They are beyond control, anattå. 
We have to begin now being aware of nåma and rúpa, they are not abstractions. 
We know that seeing sees, hearing hears, but what about this moment? We learn 
about processes of cittas, but do these not occur now? Different things appear, 
but they could not appear if there were no cittas arising in processes. When we 
are fast asleep we do not know who we are or where we are, there is no house, 
no book, nothing appears. All these things appear as soon as we wake up. 
Realities appear already, we should not try to do anything about them. Some 
people say, "I had to break off my meditation because of sickness, stress of 
circumstances or work." No, when vipassanå is being naturally developed in daily 
life one will not break off its development. I believe we should have more 
understanding of this moment, and then of a next moment, and that we should 
consider the intricacy of citta which is so variegated in the life of each one of us. 
There is no use of thinking, "when shall I attain this or that stage of insight or 
enlightenment", it depends on paññå and the other sobhana cetasikas which 
have been accumulated; they can condition the arising of insight knowledge, 
vipassanå ñåùa, when it is the right time. 

The writer of the letter thought that one should not say that realities are "beyond 
control" and that one should not say that it depends on one's accumulations 
whether kusala citta or akusala citta arises. He is inclined to stress volitional 
control. He said that, although one cannot have absolute control, there must be 
effort and a certain amount of control, otherwise one would be a victim of fate, 
one could not do anything. 

Alan Weller wrote about this subject: 

----------------------- Page 62-----------------------

                                          62 

"I think that time and again we need to be reminded of theuncontrollability of 
realities in order to develop awareness of whatever reality appears naturally. 
Otherwise there will be the idea of self having effort, energy, etc. When we hear 
the word uncontrollable it does not mean we are the victims of fate, but we have 
to carefully consider how to develop the Path. The understanding of the 
Dhamma is the condition for wholesomeness at different levels, not control. Each 
moment of being awake we accumulate either kusala or akusala. Considering the 
Dhamma more is the condition for accumulating more kusala, but that also 
depends on previous accumulation. It is better not to mind or care what reality is 
there, but to just understand it. This is for me the subtlety of the teachings. It is 
so necessary to consider a lot in order not to be misled by desire or the idea of 
self. The understanding of uncontrollability can help us to develop 
understanding and not to accumulate more ignorance. It can help us to be 
natural in our development of kusala. No matter how busy we are, kusala at 
whatever level can arise any time by its own conditions. This understanding can 
help us to be detached from our practice. We do not try. We can become patient 
with lack of results, with our akusala. The practice can become a very natural 
part of our daily life. We do not limit it by thinking of a certain place or 
situation, or by making effort now and then. Confidence in the Dhamma, a sense 
of urgency, concentration, these are different realities which work by themselves. 
They grow as the understanding of the Dhamma develops. There is no one 
besides these realities. This moment is either kusala or akusala, a keener 
understanding will realize this more and more deeply and this will lead to 
turning away from akusala. If we do not understand this moment as akusala, we 
shall accumulate more akusala. Seeing or hearing without understanding is 
dangerous. We should find out whether this moment is akusala or kusala. I learn 
to be more considerate in speech and actions, also as regards seemingly 
unimportant things, which are often overlooked in daily life, for example, not 
leaving dirty washing or cups around, since this is unpleasant for others. There 
are many examples like this so close at hand. Dhamma is in front of us all the 
time." 

When I use the expression "beyond control" I do not mean a fate, I only want to 

----------------------- Page 63-----------------------

                                          63 

explain that realities are anattå. People want to do so many things, instead of 
understanding realities just as they naturally appear. If one really scrutinizes 
oneself is there not an idea of "I do it, I want to make progress"? There must be, 
so long as we are not sotåpannas, and thus we need reminders all the time. 
There can be awareness even of such moments. 

When I say that it depends on one's accumulations of kusala and akusala what 
type of citta arises I do not mean that we are in a hopeless situation. 
Accumulations are not something static; at each moment new experiences are 
accumulated. This is hopeful, if there were no accumulation, how could we learn 
to have more mettå, or how could satipaììhåna be developed? It is not true that 
nothing can be done. We should consider the Dhamma and study more, and 
verify what we read in our own life. Hearing the Dhamma conditions more 
understanding of one's life. However, some people may hear the Dhamma but it 
does not mean anything to them. Why? They have no accumulations for it. 

If someone thinks that he is a hopeless victim of his accumulations and cannot 
develop understanding, it is a moment of thinking which is akusala. When he 
thinks, "I cannot", he thinks so because of his lack of understanding of 
conditions. When right understanding is developed it can understand this 
moment only. Dhamma is subtle and intricate, one really needs to consider it 
carefully. All moments of consideration of realities are accumulated, they are 
never lost. Thus understanding can grow and grow, until the time has come for 
direct awareness without thinking about realities. Then another step has been 
taken. Nobody can plan or control the arising of the stages of insight and 
enlightenment. Can we accept this or is there a secret resistance against this 
fact? We want to control all the time. The wish to control leads one away from 
developing understanding naturally in daily life. Some people want to sit and 
concentrate first on breathing, or on rúpas of the body they believe they can feel 
moving. One may be inclined to do something else first, anything else except 
knowing the present moment. Thus it is understandable that some people like to 
stress volitional control more than paññå. 

Volition, cetanå cetasika, arising with each citta, is like a supervisor of the 
accompanying cetasikas, but it supervises them only at that one moment that it 
arises together with them. It cannot call paññå to come forward when there is no 

----------------------- Page 64-----------------------

                                           64 

paññå at that moment. There is kusala volition and akusala volition, there is 
volition arising with vipåkacitta and with kiriyacitta (inoperative citta) and these 
volitions are different all the time. They are conditioned by the accompanying 
dhammas and in their turn they also condition the accompanying dhammas. 
Volition is not a factor of the eightfold Path. Viriya (energy) is, but it is energy or 
courage for being aware and developing understanding of the reality which is 
appearing. It must arise together with right understanding of the eightfold Path 
in order to perform its function, and it prevents one from becoming disheartened 
about the development. 

When we read about striving we should not think of merely striving with the 
exclusion of the other path-factors. One may still cling to an idea of self who 
strives, who exerts control over one’s cittas, although one understands in theory 
that realities are anattå. Some people try to separate their “meditation life” and 
their daily life. They believe that, for the development of the eightfold Path, it is 
necessary to go into seclusion first in order to suppress akusala and to induce 
calm. One may be used to the idea of exerting control over one’s cittas, but it 
should be remembered that realities arise because of their own conditions. When 
awareness arises of the reality appearing now, even if it is unpleasant or akusala, 
it is accompanied already by right effort which performs its function without an 
idea of self who strives. Right effort is nothing else but effort for awareness right 
now and it arises because of its own conditions. What would be the use of the 
study of the Dhamma if it would not lead to the aim which is right 
understanding of whatever reality appears. We are the frequent victims of our 
own accumulations so long as we are not arahats yet. But realizing this is already 
a beginning of a cure, because we see that akusala is not self, that it is a 
conditioned nåma. Right understanding will finally lead to the elimination of 
akusala. 

I think we should not become impatient or disheartened by lack of sati, lack of 
kusala. Gradually conditions can be built up for the growth of paññå. Not by 
volitional control. Not by trying to make particular realities arise, special objects 
of awareness, or doing special exercises, instead of being aware naturally of 
realities which arise because of their own conditions. It does not matter if the 
reality which arises is a hindrance, it can be known as it is and then there is 

----------------------- Page 65-----------------------

                                        65 

kusala citta, no hindrance. 

When we have more understanding of paramattha dhammas we can read the 
suttas with more understanding. We read about striving and self-control, but we 
shall understand the deep meaning of what is said: that these are sobhana 
cetasikas arising because of conditions. The teachings can be most helpful in 
reminding us to cling less to an idea of self who can develop insight. We do not 
develop understanding, it develops. 

******* 

----------------------- Page 66-----------------------

                                                 66 

 Letter about Vipassanå6 

Vienna, 

November 1, ‘89 

The development of satipaììhåna is the only way to know the truth of 
impermanence, dukkha and anattå . However, we all notice that mindfulness 
does not often arise and that nåma and rúpa are not known as they are. We 
confuse all the different doorways and we do not realize nåma as nåma and rúpa 
as rúpa; we cannot distinguish them from each other. We know that the 
eightfold Path has to be developed, but it is difficult to develop it. Khun Sujin 
said that we are too sick to be able to walk. She reminded us that the wholesome 

                                                             7 
qualities which are the "påramís", the perfections  , must be developed together 
with satipaììhåna; they are like vitamins which will give us the strength to walk 
the Path. The Buddha, when he was still a Bodhisatta, developed the påramís for 
aeons. We all need the perfection of resolution(adiììhåna), which is the 
resolution to continue being mindful of the nåma or rúpa appearing right now. 
We know that the Path is difficult and that it will take many lives to develop it 
and therefore, we need the firm resolution to continue on. When we come to 
know more our akusala we shall understand that defilements are deeply rooted. 
Akusala is like weed which is deeply rooted and not easily pulled out. We need 
the perfection of wisdom; it is right understanding which can pull out the roots 
of lobha, attachment, dosa, aversion, and moha, ignorance. We need the 
perfection of energy or courage, viriya, so that we shall not become downhearted 
when progress is slow. We should encourage ourselves to continue on with 
mindfulness of nåma and rúpa. The perfection of patience is important; we 
should listen to the Dhamma with patience and consider it carefully, so that we 
can develop understanding of realities in the situation of our daily life. We need 
the perfection of loving kindness, mettå, as a means to have kusala citta when 
we are with other people or when we think of them. When mettå arises we 
consider other people as our close friends, even when we do not know them, 

7 The wholesome qualities which the Bodhisatta developed during countless lives and which were conditions to 

attain Buddhahood. They are: generosity (dåna), morality(síla), detachment (nekkhamma), energy (viriya), 
wisdom (paññå), patience (khanti), truthfulness (sacca), resolution (adiììhåna), loving kindness (mettå) and 
equanimity (upekkhå). 

----------------------- Page 67-----------------------

                                          67 

when they are strangers to us. We shall think of ways and means to help them 
and to make them happy. It is natural that there are people we do not find 
sympathetic, but when aversion or anger arises we should consider that 
characteristic. Then we shall see more clearly that aversion is useless and we can 
be reminded to develop mettå rightnow. For the development of mettå it is 
necessary to have right understanding of the different cittas which arise. When 
someone else speaks unpleasant words to us we are likely to have resentment, 
but when we see the value of kusala we can graduallylearn to refrain from 
retorting such words and to forgive him. Forgiving is a kind of generosity, it is 
like handing a gift to someone. 

Sarah said to Khun Sujin that it is more difficult to develop mettåwhen we are 
tired because then we are more easily irritated and annoyed. Although we see 
the value of mettå we do not have enough confidence in kusala; we have no 
conditions for kusala at the moment we want to have it. Khun Sujin answered 
that the idea of self is in the way all the time. We attach too much importance to 
the way we feel. Tiredness is no reason for being angry, we should develop mettå 
in order to think less of ourselves. 

We need also the perfections of generosity, of síla and of detachment or 
renunciation (nekkhamma) so that we shall be less selfish and more considerate 
for other people's wellbeing.All the perfections should be developed, they are a 
necessary support for the arising of sati and paññå in our daily life. Sati may not 
often arise, but when there is patience we do not mind it if understanding 
develops only little by little. There is conceit when we believe that we should be 
"somebody with great wisdom". We should follow Såriputta's example who 
compared himself with a dustrag, a useless rag without any value. If we do not 
consider ourselves "somebody", but rather a "nobody", it will prevent us from 
pretending, even to ourselves, that we are more advanced than we in reality are. 
We also need the perfection of truthfulness (sacca) to keep us on the right track. 
We have to be sincere, truthful to reality. Do we want to avoid being aware of 
akusala? We have to be aware of it in order to know our true accumulations. If 
we are not aware of akusala we shall take what is akusala for kusala. We need to 
develop the perfection of equanimity, upekkhå, in order to learn to accept with 
kusala citta the vicissitudes of life. Praise and blame are only realities which arise 

----------------------- Page 68-----------------------

                                                68 

because of their own conditions; in reality people are not the cause of praise or 
blame.When people do wrong to us we can develop mettå if we see the value of 
mettå. Instead of having aversion about people's bad points we shall try to 
remember their good qualities. If they have none there can be compassion or 
there can be equanimity. Equanimity can arise when we remember that the real 
cause of unpleasant experiences through the senses is not a person but our own 
kamma. 

We should carefully consider the different perfections and then we shall be 
reminded to develop them in our daily life, they are necessary in each situation. 
Khun Sujin said that while she prepares lectures for the radio she needs many 
perfections, such as mettå, patience, energy and equanimity. When there is 
equanimity she does not feel hurt when people do not want to listen to her or 
when they criticize her. 

The perfection of wisdom must be developed from life to life. We know that we 
should realize the difference between paramattha dhammas, namely, nåma and 
rúpa, and concepts. We know that the object of satipaììhåna is nåma and rúpa, 
not concepts. It is necessary to consider the difference between paramattha 
dhammas and concepts in detail, under different aspects, in our daily life. All 
such moments of considering are accumulated, they condition the growth of 
paññå, so that one day, we do not know when, direct understanding of nåma 
and rúpa can arise. 

When we see, we think that we are in this world, a world full of people, houses 
and streets. When we hear, we think that we are in this world, we hear people, 
animals, cars. We think all the time of the whole wide world with everything in 
it. In reality there is only one moment of seeing and one moment of hearing. 
Seeing sees just that which appears through eyes, visible object, and then both 
seeing and visible object fall away. After that we think of a person or of the 

                                   8 
whole world, because saññå   remembers. There is only one moment of hearing 
and then both hearing and sound fall away, but we keep on thinking about what 
was heard, because saññå remembers. 

When we think of a person or of the world, the object of citta is a concept. As 

8 Saññå cetasika, remembrance or perception, arises with each citta. It remembers or recognizes the object or 

marks it so that it can be recognized later on. 

----------------------- Page 69-----------------------

                                           69 

soon as we notice the shape and form of a person or a thing there is a concept of 
a whole. Even when we do not think of names we can still have a concept as 
object. When we perceive a pen we experience already a concept before we think 
about the name "pen". Children who cannot talk yet and who do not know the 
meaning of conventional terms which are used in language can experience 
concepts of a "whole". When they grow up they learn conventional terms so that 
they can name different things. They can then understand which person or thing 
is referred to. The English word "concept" (in Påli: paññatti) stands for the idea 
which is the object of thinking as well as the name or term used to denote such 
an idea. 

We should not try to avoid thinking of concepts; even the arahat thinks of 
concepts because there are conditions for thinking. The arahat does not cling to 
concepts but we are still clinging. We have not eradicated "attå-saññå", the 
wrong remembrance of things as "self". We cling to the general appearance of 
things and to the details. When we cling to the image of a man or woman we do 
not know the reality which appears through the eyes, visible object, and thus we 
know only a concept, not a reality. We do not only like the general appearance of 
things, we also like the details. We are attached to the trademark of clothing, of 
cars. 

Someone wrote to me that conventional truth is still truth: citta, cetasika and 
rúpa constitute the whole of a person, a living being which really exists. He finds 
that at the moment we adopt the discipline of vipassanå, paramattha dhammas 
appear and at the moments we deal with our ordinary life in the world, 
conventional truth appears. 

I believe that we should not think in terms of the “discipline of vipassanå” as 
being separated from our daily life. There are conditions to think of concepts, of 
"wholes", we need conventional terms in order to communicate with other 
people. We should lead our daily life naturally, but we can develop 
understanding of citta, cetasika and rúpa in our daily life. One may believe that 
these are constituents of a whole, but where is that whole? It only exists in our 
thinking, it cannot be directly experienced. We think that we see people lifting 
their hands or walking, but in reality there are countless nåmas and rúpas arising 
and falling away. So long as we do not realize the arising and falling away of 

----------------------- Page 70-----------------------

                                                70 

nåma and rúpa, we cling to the idea that what appears are people, women or 
men, or this or that thing. We cling to the concept of somebody or something. 

Khun Sujin writes in "A Survey of Paramattha Dhammas", in the section on 
"Concepts": 

“In order to know that concepts are not paramattha dhammas one should learn 
to discern the characteristics of the different paramattha dhammas which arise 
together. One should be aware of one characteristic at a time as it appears 
through one doorway at a time. The arising and falling away should be realized 
of rúpa which appears through one doorway at a time, so that the truth can be 
known. Each rúpa lasts only as long as seventeen moments of citta and then it 
falls away. Therefore rúpa which arises has no time to stand, walk or do 
anything. During the time one lifts one's hand already more than seventeen 

                     9 
moments of citta   have passed. One sees people walking or lifting their hands 
but in reality the rúpas which arise fall away immediately and are succeeded by 
other rúpas. The rúpa which is visible object appears to cittas of the eye-door 
process and then, after there have been bhavanga-cittas in between, there are 
many mind-door processes of cittas. That is why one can see people walking or 
lifting their hands. Seventeen moments of citta pass away extremely rapidly. 
Thus one should consider what happens in reality. One should know that the 
rúpa which appears at this moment through the eyes only lasts seventeen 
moments of citta and that it must fall away before sound can be experienced 
through ears. It seems that there can be hearing and seeing at the same time, but 
in between the moment of hearing and the moment of seeing there is an interval 
of more than seventeen moments of citta. The visible object which appears 
through the eyes and lasts seventeen moments of citta must have fallen away 
before the citta which hears arises. 

It seems that there can be hearing and seeing at the same time, but these are 
different moments of citta experiencing different objects. Rúpas arise and fall 
away and succeed one another. Visible object appears through the eye-door and 
after there have been bhavanga-cittas in between it appears through the mind- 

9 Rúpa does not fall away as rapidly as citta, but it still falls away very rapidly. Comparing the duration of rúpa 

with the duration of citta it has been explained that rúpa lasts as long as seventeen moments of citta. 

----------------------- Page 71-----------------------

                                           71 

door. Then there are many mind-door processes of cittas which think of 
concepts. That is why people who walk, lift their hands or move can appear.“ 

We may have often heard that paramattha dhammas are notconcepts and we 
may have repeated this for ourselves, but that is not enough. When right 
understanding of realities is being developed we can learn when the object of 
citta is a paramattha dhamma and when there is thinking of a concept. It 
depends entirely on conditions whether a paramattha dhamma appears and 
there can be awareness of its characteristic, or whether one thinks of a concept. 

We are inclined to cling to a self who develops satipaììhåna and we want to 
hasten the arising of the stages of insight. If we have such desire it hinders the 
understanding of realities as anattå. The stages of insight can only arise when 
there are the right conditions for their arising, not because we try to direct their 
arising. 

Khun Sujin writes about mindfulness in "A Survey of Paramattha Dhammas", in 
the section on the "Stages of Insight": 

“Mindfulness is not easy and in the beginning it cannot often arise. The reason is 
that ignorance, clinging and all the other akusala dhammas have been 
accumulated for an endlessly long time in the cycle of birth and death. And also 
in this life, from the time we were born, defilements are being accumulated each 
day. When we correctly understand cause and effect of realities we know that we 
need great patience and perseverance so that we can listen to the Dhamma, 
study it carefully and consider it. Only thus can one have understanding of the 
realities which appear through eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and mind- 
door. When the right conditions have been accumulated for the arising of 
satipaììhåna, the characteristics of the realities which are appearing can be 
investigated by being directly aware of them. Thus, eventually, realities will be 
known as they are. Through the practice one shall directly understand the truth 
in accordance with what one has learnt and understood intellectually, namely, 
that all dhammas, and thus also satipaììhåna and the eightfold Path, are anattå. 
Satipaììhåna can arise when there are the right conditions, that is, when mahå- 

----------------------- Page 72-----------------------

                                          72 

kusala citta accompanied by paññå has arisen time and again so that paññå can 
be accumulated. Then we shall not deviate anymore from the right Path. We 
shall not follow a practice which is other than being aware of, noticing and 
considering the nåma-dhammas and rúpa-dhammas which are appearing 
through the six doors.“ 

We may pay attention to different realities and we may remember that seeing is 
nåma, that it is different from visible object which is rúpa. The direct experience 
of nåma as nåma and of rúpa as rúpa, without any idea of self is another step 
which has to be taken. Nobody else can show us exactly how the truth can be 
directly experienced, because paññå develops according to its own conditions. 
Seeing arises and we have learnt that seeing is nåma, but so long as paññå has 
not eradicated the idea of self, we still have an idea of self who sees. 

When paññå has been developed to the degree that the first stage of insight, 
vipassanå ñåùa, arises, characteristics of nåma and rúpa appear clearly, one at a 
time, through the mind-door. Their different characteristics are clearly 
distinguished from each other. At that moment there is no idea of self who 
experiences and there is no idea of a "whole" or of the world. There is "anattå- 
saññå", the perception of non-self, instead of "attå-saññå", the perception of self. 
Only nåma and rúpa are appearing one at a time. If we really understand that 
there must be anattå-saññå at the moment of vipassanå ñåùa, we shall not try to 
create conditions for the arising of vipassanå ñåùa, because then there is an idea 
of self. This would be counteractive to the development of vipassanå. 

When the moments of vipassanå ñåùa have fallen away, the world appears as 
before, as it used to appear, as a "whole" or a conglomeration of things, Khun 
Sujin explained. We may be surprised that realities appear as anattåonly at the 
moment of vipassanå ñåùa, and that after that the world appears as usual, as a 
"whole". Has nothing changed? We may think that it is already an achievement 
to have reached the first stage of vipassanå ñåùa but it is not enough. The 
accumulated clinging to a self is very persistent, it cannot be eradicated by the 
first vipassanå ñåùa.One has to apply the knowledge one has gained at the 
moments of vipassanå ñåùa and go on developing understanding of all nåmas 
and rúpas which appear. 

----------------------- Page 73-----------------------

                                                      73 

It is only at the fourth stage of insight, which is the first stage of "principal 

           10 
insight"   , that the arising and falling away of nåma and rúpa can be realized. 
Now, at this moment, hardness appears and it falls away immediately. However, 
it is succeeded so rapidly by the next rúpa which is hardness that it seems that 
hardness stays. Each reality is succeeded by a next one which is similar but not 
the same. Each reality appears only once in the cycle of birth and death and then 
it disappears, it never comes back. When we meet people who are dear to us we 
should not forget that seeing only sees visible object and that seeing and visible 
object only last for a moment and are then gone for ever. "Everything goes, goes, 
goes", Khun Sujin reminded us. It comes and then goes for ever. It is useful to 
reflect about impermanence, but it is not the same as the direct experience of the 
arising and falling away of nåma and of rúpa. When the first stage of "principal 

                                                                                11 
insight" has arisen, vipassanå has become a "power" (bala)   . 

When there is mindfulness of hardness now, knowledge ofthis characteristic is 
still coarse; realities have not been precisely understood yet. There is no 
realization of the characteristic of each nåma and rúpa which appears one at a 
time, no realization of their arising and falling away. When insight has become a 
“power” it is unshakable. However, at the first stage of principal insight paññå is 
not keen enough yet so that there can be detachment from realities. At the 
second stage of "principal insight", "Knowledge of Dissolution" (bhanga ñåùa), 
paññå turns more towards the falling away of realities and sees that they cannot 
be any refuge. Even when insight has become already a “power” its development 
should continue on so that there can be more and more "turning away" from 
nåma and rúpa. 

We read in the "Path of Discrimination" (Paìisambhidåmagga, Treatise on 
Knowledge, Ch XXXIV, par. 455): 

Insight power: in what sense is insight a power? 

10 
  The first three stages of vipassanå ñåùa are beginning stages, they are called “tender insight”, taruùa 
vipassanå. The fourth stage is the first stage of mahå-vipassanå ñåùa. Mahå means great. The objects of insight 
are the nåma and rúpa which appear, and as insight develops their characteristics are penetrated more. 

11 
  Specific cetasikas have been classified as “spiritual powers” which should be developed, namely: confidence, 
energy, mindfulness, concentration and wisdom (insight). When these have been developed so that they are 
unshakable by their opposites, they have become powers. 

----------------------- Page 74-----------------------

                                         74 

Through contemplation of impermanence it is unshakable by perception of 
permanence, thus insight is a power. Through contemplation of dukkha it is 
unshakable by perception of pleasure... Through contemplation of anattå it is 
unshakable by perception of self...Through contemplation of dispassion it is 
unshakable by delight... Through contemplation of fading away it is unshakable 
by greed... Through contemplation of cessation it is unshakable by arising... 
Through contemplation of relinquishment it is unshakable by grasping, thus 
insight is a power. 

It is unshakable, immovable and cannot be shifted by ignorance and by the 
defilements and khandhas that accompany ignorance, thus insight is a power. 

This is insight as a power. 

Right understanding has to be developed of all realities which appear through 
the six doors so that insight can become a power. When we see what we do not 
know yet we can have a sense of urgency to continue on with satipaììhåna. Gabi 
wrote to me that she had read Khun Sujin's "Stages of Insight" with great 
pleasure. She wrote: 

“This shows with great clarity how intricate the development of satipaììhåna is 
and how complicated it is. This does not discourage me at all, on the contrary, I 
enjoy it to take up time and again the scriptures and then I am reminded of the 
truth in my daily life. I am reminded that only paramatthas are real and 
everything else is only imagination.” 

In the commentary to the Therígåthå , Canto XXXIV, Sukkå , we read that 
Sukkåhad in many former lives listened to Buddhas, renounced worldly life, 
studied the Dhamma and explained it to others. Inspite of her great knowledge 
of the Dhamma she did not attain enlightenment. In this Buddha era she listened 
to the Buddha and when she heard Dhammadinnåpreach she developed insight 
and reached arahatship. Once when she preached the Dhamma, a deva who 
lived in a tree was inspired by her words and incited people to come and listen to 

----------------------- Page 75-----------------------

                                           75 

her. Sukkå, at the end of her life, declared her attainment in a verse. She called 
out her own name Sukkå , which means: bright, lustrous. We read: 

O Child of light! by light of truth set free 

From cravings dire, firm, self-possessed, serene, 

Bear to this end your last incarnate frame, 

For you have conquered Måra and his host. 

This story shows us that it takes aeons to develop paññå.Even Sukkå who 
listened to several Buddhas needed aeons to develop the perfections together 
with satipaììhåna. However, instead of wondering how arahatship could ever be 
achieved we can take note of the benefits of satipaììhåna even now. Before we 
studied the Dhamma we did not know anything about citta, cetasika and rúpa. 
We did not know that on account of the pleasant or unpleasant objects 
experienced through the senses defilements such as attachment or aversion arise. 
Through the study of the Dhamma and through satipaììhåna there will gradually 
be less ignorance of the realities of our daily life. The development of right 
understanding takes aeons but even a moment of right understanding now of a 
nåma or a rúpa is beneficial because it can be accumulated from moment to 
moment. We should not lure ourselves into thinking that through satipaììhåna 
we shall have less aversion, dosa. First the wrong view of self has to be 
eradicated and only at the third stage of enlightenment, the stage of the non- 
returner, anågåmí, dosa is eradicated. Because of the study of the Buddha’s 
teachings we may notice that there is aversion, for example, when we are talking 
and we have unpleasant feeling. Then we are thinking about “our dosa”, we take 
it for self. Through satipaììhåna we can learn to see defilements as conditioned 
realities which are non-self. Also when we see the disadvantage of akusala and 
we abstain from unwholesome speech, we should remember that it is not self 
who abstains, but a type of nåma arising because of its own conditions. 

We read in the scriptures about Såriputta’s generosity, humility and gentleness. 
He had no anger and could forgive anything. This can inspire us with confidence 

----------------------- Page 76-----------------------

                                                  76 

in the benefit of satipììhåna which eventually leads to the fulfillment of all the 
perfections. However, we should not forget that Såriputta had developed right 
understanding during countless lives until he had eradicated all defilements. He 
had reached arahatship. 

We read in the "Commentary to the Dhammapada" (XXVI,7,commentary to vs. 
389, 390) about Såriputta's virtues. A brahman wanted to test his patience and 
therefore tried to provoke his anger. When Såriputta walked for alms he went 
behind him and struck him violently with his fist in the back. Såriputta said 
"What was that?", and then, without turning around to look, continued on his 
way. When the brahman became remorseful and asked forgiveness, Såriputta 
forgave him and accepted his invitation to receive food in his house. We read in 
the Commentary that the monks were discussing this incident and were offended 
about it that the brahman had struck Såriputta. The Buddha said to them: 

“Monks, no Brahman ever strikes another Brahman; it must have been a 

                                                                  12 
householder-Brahman who struck a monk-Brahman   ; for when a man attains 
the fruit of the third Path (anågåmí or non-returner), all anger is utterly 
destroyed in him.” 

We then read that the Buddha explained the Dhamma and spoke the following 
stanzas, which are the verses 389 and 390 of the “Dhammapada”: 

vs. 389. One should not strike a brahman; a brahman should not vent (his 
wrath) on him. Shame on him who strikes a brahman! More shame on him who 
gives vent (to his wrath). 

vs. 390. Unto a brahman that (non-retaliation) is of no small advantage. When 
the mind is weaned from things dear, whenever the intent to harm ceases, then 
and then only sorrow subsides. 

12 
  In the scriptures the word brahman is used in the sense of the person who develops the eightfold Path leading 
to arahatship. The arahat has eradicated all defilements. 

----------------------- Page 77-----------------------

                                         77 

When all defilements have been eradicated there is an end to dukkha. There is 
no attachment and when someone else behaves in an unpleasant way one has no 
feelings of resentment, no aversion. There is perfect calm. 

******** 

----------------------- Page 78-----------------------

                                          78 

Letter about Vipassanå7 

the Hague, 

May 20, 1991 

 Dear Sarah, 

Thank you for the tapes which you made in Bangkok when you and Jonothan 
were visiting Khun Sujin. The discussions were invarious surroundings: in the 
Safari Park, in the car, in a restaurant with loud background music, in a Park 
with a Japanese garden and in Khun Sujin's house. The scenery changes all the 
time but there are only nåma and rúpa: visible object and seeing, sound and 
hearing and all the other realities. They appear but we need reminders so that 
we are not forgetful of what appears all the time. In your letter you wrote that 
you had carefully planned Dhamma discussions in the afternoon during the three 
days you were in Bangkok, but that things turned out quite differently from what 
you expected. Khun Sujin was ill one of these days and thus she could not speak 
much. However, you had a good discussion with her sister and with Khun 
Duangduen. We make beautiful plans but we never know what will happen, 
because whatever happens is conditioned. Your letter was a good reminder of 
this truth. I liked Khun Sujin's reminder: "Everyday life is a test for the 
development of understanding." We are in different circumstances, some 
pleasant, some unpleasant, but we should not forget that there are realities 
appearing through the six doors, wherever we are. 

You spoke about the stress of everyday life, when you are in the situation of your 
work. You find it difficult to remember that there are only nåma and rúpa, and 
this is a problem we all have. When we are rushing around to finish our tasks 
such as cleaning the house or cooking, we believe that we need more leisure 
time, more time for reading suttas. But, as Jonothan remarked, do we really use 
our free time for Dhamma, or do we take up other activities, such as playing with 
the computer, solving problems with it? Different cittas motivate our activities, 
some are kusala but many more are akusala. They arise because of conditions, 
and instead of trying to exert control over them we should develop 
understanding of them. I liked Khun Sujin's answer that we should not worry, 

----------------------- Page 79-----------------------

                                           79 

that worry is akusala and that we should develop understanding at ease. I shall 
quote her words: 

"... Develop at ease, don't rush. You should not want a result soon. One should 
understand one's own understanding. When there is a moment of not 
understanding it cannot be changed into a moment of understanding. When 
there is no understanding of visible object yet one can begin to develop 
understanding of it." 

Khun Sujin spoke about her daily life. She goes out shopping, she plays scrabble 
or receives visitors. She does not always read the scriptures, but she listens every 
day to Dhamma on the radio. She follows the Middle Way. We cannot exert 
control over the arising of sati or direct it to specific objects. It is unpredictable 
what the next moment will be like. When there is attachment we can see it as 
just a reality. Khun Sujin pointed out that we need many "ingredients" for the 
growth of right understanding. These ingredients are the sobhana cetasikas 
(beautiful mental factors) which have been accumulated and which support one 
another and cooperate so that right understandingdevelops to the degree that it 
can achieve detachment from the self. A cook needs many ingredients in order to 
compose a meal. In the same way many ingredients are needed for a moment of 
precise understanding of the reality which appears. It is necessary to accumulate 
many moments of reading, listening, studying and considering. When we study 
the Dhamma in detail, we collect ingredients which lead to direct understanding 
later on. Khun Sujin said: 

"We read in order to understand this moment. 

 We listen in order to understand this moment. 

 We consider in order to understand this moment." 

When one is aware and there is no progress, one can know why: there is not 
enough understanding of the details of the Dhamma.You were wondering why 

----------------------- Page 80-----------------------

                                                  80 

one should know about details such as the four Great Elements of Earth, Water, 
Fire and Wind, which names designate the rúpas of solidity, cohesion, 

                                                                          13 
temperature and motion arising with each group of rúpas   . I liked the 
discussion you had with Khun Sujin, because usually people are wondering why 
it is necessary to know such details. You asked why it was not enough just to be 
aware of hardness when it appears. Khun Sujin answered that when one is just 
aware of hardness it is not enough. There are many realities which appear and 
they are conditioned by different factors. Visible object is the rúpa which appears 
through eyesense, but visible object does not arise alone, it arises in a group of 
other rúpas in which also the four Great Elements take part. Visible objects are 
various because they are conditioned by different compositions of the four Great 
Elements which arise together with them. Detailed knowledge helps us to see 
that what we experience is nothing but conditioned reality. The more we 
understand conditions the more shall we understand that there is no self. The 
study of the Dhamma is never lost, because the understanding acquired from it is 
accumulated, even from life to life. If we in a next life can listen to the Dhamma 
again there are conditions to understand the Dhamma more deeply. It is 
beneficial to know about the different cittas which arise in processes because this 
is our daily life. As Khun Sujin said, we study in order to know this moment. We 
should not forget the goal of our study: detachment from the idea of self by right 
understanding. This understanding eventually leads to the eradication of all 
defilements. There is impingement of visible object, sound and the other sense 
objects on the relevant sense-doors and these objects are experienced by cittas 
which arise and fall away, succeeding one another in processes. In a process of 
cittas there are moments of citta which are either kusala or akusala, but most of 
the time we are ignorant of this. On account of the objects which are experienced 
through the different doorways we form up long stories, we are quite absorbed 
in our thinking. The cittas which think arise in mind-door processes and they 
may be kusala, but most of thetime they are akusala. We cling to the people 
around us or we are annoyed about them, and we forget that there are no 
people, only nåma and rúpa. Khun Sujin stressed during the discussion that 
when we go to sleep all the stories we made up during the day are forgotten. It is 

13 
  Rúpas arise and fall away in groups, consisting of at least eight rúpas, namely, the four great Elements and in 
addition colour, odour, flavour and nutritive essence. As regards the rúpas of the body, some groups consist of 
eight kinds of rúpa, and some consist of more than eight. 

----------------------- Page 81-----------------------

                                           81 

true that when I am asleep I do not know who I am, whom I am married to or 
where I live. We have forgotten our joys, fears and worries. When we are asleep 
and not dreaming there are no processes of cittas which experience objects 
impinging on the six doors. There are bhavanga cittas (life-continuum), cittas 
which have the function of keeping the continuity in life, and these cittas 
experience the same object as the rebirth-consciousness, which is the object 
experienced shortly before the dying-consciousness of the previous life. It is 
beneficial to know about such details, it helps us to understand that all the 
stories we are absorbed in now are nothing at all. They exist only so long as we 
are thinking about them, but they are forgotten as soon as we are asleep. Khun 
Sujin said that we should not wait until we go to sleep to forget about the stories 
we make up. One can come to realize that the processes of cittas which 
experience sense objects pass like a flash and that on account of them there is 
thinking. We live in our own world of thinking from birth to death. We have 
different feelings because of our thinking, but everything passes like a flash, it is 
very temporary. After seeing there is thinking, after hearing there is thinking. 
What we are used to taking for a permanent thing appears for a very short 
moment and then it is completely gone. We have heard this before but it is so 
good to be reminded of the truth. Khun Sujin remarked: 

"In your idea it is as if things are permanent, but it all is so short, it is nothing at 
all. When one says, "Life is so short", one should remember that each moment is 
shorter. It never comes back. We listen to the song of a bird but it is completely 
gone in split seconds." 

You remarked that you are just thinking about temporariness, and that this is a 
way of samatha or calm with impermanence as object. This is a good point you 
brought up. We know that we understand about impermanence in theory, that 
we can think about it, but that we do not directly experience the truth. I quote 
your conversation with Khun Sujin: 

Khun Sujin: "There can also be a moment of insight, ofunderstanding realities 

----------------------- Page 82-----------------------

                                         82 

which arise and fall away, but it depends on the development of understanding 
whether that degree has been reached or not yet. It is not a matter of wanting or 
trying, but of developing." 

Sarah: "When we talk about stages of insight we start to worry. Why should we 
not just be aware of the characteristic which appears?" 

Khun Sujin: "Even if one talks about stages of insight one does not have to worry 
about it. There may be ignorance and attachment. People worry because they 
want to experience the stages of insight. One has to develop understanding. 
Then one does not worry about the different stages. One knows that one will 
reach them one day if the Path is right. One moment of understanding will lead 
to more understanding. There are only six doorways. Seeing continues from life 
to life. If one dies now and one is reborn for example in a deva plane, seeing 
follows instantly and it is like this from aeon to aeon. One sees a great deal and 
there is no understanding of seeing until one listens to the Dhamma and begins 
to develop understanding. There can be understanding of seeing as it is. 

If someone thinks that the development of understanding is too difficult and that 
he should do other things in order to have more awareness he does not see the 
value of a moment of being aware of a reality, of understanding it. " 

The following sutta reminds us that understanding does not develop by mere 
wishing, that it only grows by developing it right now. We read in the "Gradual 
Sayings" (Book of the Threes, Ch X,§ 91, Urgent): 

Monks, there are these three urgent duties of a yeoman farmer. What three? 

Herein, monks, the yeoman farmer gets his field well ploughed and harrowed 
very quickly. Having done so he puts in his seed very quickly. Having done that 
he lets the water in and turns it off very quickly. These are his three urgent 
duties. 

Now, monks, that yeoman farmer has no such magic power or authority as to 
say: "Let my crops spring up today. Tomorrow let them ear. On the following day 
let them ripen." No! It is just the due season which makes them do this. 

----------------------- Page 83-----------------------

                                         83 

In the same way there are these three urgent duties of a monk. What three? 

The undertaking of training in higher síla, in higher citta and in higher insight. 
These are his three urgent duties. 

Now the monk has no such magic power or authority as to say: "Today let my 
mind be released from the åsavas without grasping, or tomorrow, or the 
following day." No! It is just the due season which releases his mind, as he 
undergoes the training in these three. 

Wherefore, monks, thus must you train yourselves: Keen shall be our desire to 
undertake the training in these three branches of training. That is how you must 
train yourselves. 

There is higher síla, higher citta ( higher concentration) and higher insight when 
the eightfold Path is being developed. We may keep on thinking that the 
realization of the truth is too difficult. We delay awareness of the present 
moment and we still expect that there can once be realization of the truth. We 
should not wait for a miracle to happen. If there is no development of 
understanding now defilements cannot be eradicated. We cannot hasten the 
development of understanding, but when we see that the development of the 
eightfold Path is the only way to eliminate ignorance there will be conditions for 
awareness. At the same time it is necessary to remember that there should not be 
an idea of self who tries to be aware. There should not be clinging to awareness, 
then it cannot arise. It arises because of its own conditions which are study of the 
Dhamma, listening and considering. We should not blame the situation we are in 
for our lack of awareness. Khun Sujin said: 

"When we want to control the situation we create new stories, new concepts. 
Someone who sees the value of awareness is aware instantly and has no wish to 
go to other places. He knows that it takes a long time to develop understanding." 

You had a discussion about knowing the difference between kusala and akusala. 
We know in theory that they are different but we find it difficult to know directly 

----------------------- Page 84-----------------------

                                         84 

when the citta is kusala and when it is akusala. When we help someone there are 
kusala cittas, but there are also akusala cittas with attachment to the person we 
help or with attachment to "our kusala". Cittas are very intricate and they change 
very quickly. Khun Sujin said that it is important to know the difference between 
kusala and akusala, otherwise we cannot develop kusala. She explained that we 
can only know the present moment: 

"If we do not talk about this moment how can we know whether the citta is 
kusala or akusala? It is helpful to know this in daily life. When you think of the 
other person's benefit without attachment there can be kusala at the level of 
dåna. People have kusala cittas in a day but they don't know it. Right 
understanding can understand that there are different nåmas." 

Khun Duangduen had offered coffee to Jonothan and while she was thinking of 
his benefit without attachment the citta was kusala. Generally we worry too 
much about the development of kusala. Khun Sujin remarked that some people 
think and think and think how they can have more kusala whereas others just 
perform it whenever there is time and opportunity. We keep on worrying about 
kusala and also about our akusala. I noticed that Khun Sujin stressed several 
times that one should not worry and that one should develop right 
understanding at ease. She repeated what she had said in India about her anger. 
She said that it is no problem to her when she gets angry since it has conditions 
for its arising. She does not think, "O, I studied a lot and therefore I should not 
have anger." Gabi had listened to the tapes which were recorded in India and she 
wrote to me about her reactions concerning this subject: 

"I was so surprised when I heard Khun Sujin say, 'I am not bothered by my dosa, 
I don't want to control it'. I was struck by these words and they made me have a 
totally new approach to dosa and anattå, not self. Khun Sujin had often said, 'It 
is not your dosa', but this had not convinced me. Should one not work on 
oneself, should one not pull oneself together, and if one has the will to do this 
can one not succeed? Seminars are organised to help people with problems in 

----------------------- Page 85-----------------------

                                          85 

relationship and to make them change their behaviour, and these seminars are 
successful. And now I hear from Khun Sujin, 'I am not bothered by my dosa and I 
don't want to control it'. Why am I bothered by my dosa? Because the 
accompanying feeling is unpleasant and my fellowmen do not like me for it, or 
they do not admire me. 

We cannot prevent thinking, but it is important not to forget that dhammas are 
anattå , beyond control. I think that one could say that Khun Sujin does not want 
to control 'her' dosa and that she is therefore not disturbed by it." 

That is the answer. When we realize that whatever appears is "only a reality", 
that it is conditioned, not self, we shall be less disturbed by it. This does not 
mean that we should not developwholesome qualities. We notice that we often 
fail but instead of having aversion there can be a moment of understanding of 
what appears and then the citta is kusala. Dosa will arise again but then there 
can be a moment of understanding of its characteristic. When we really consider 
realities and we are aware of them there will be a keener understanding of their 
characteristics. "One does not worry, one keeps on developing understanding", as 
Khun Sujin said. 

You were having tea and squeezing a lemon, and then Khun Sujin reminded you 
of the present moment. She said: "When you squeeze a lemon there can be, 
instead of thinking of awareness, understanding of the characteristic which 
appears". We think and worry about awareness but we forget to attend to 
characteristics of softness or hardness which appear time and again through the 
bodysense. 

 Jonothan remarked that the characteristic of anattå does not appear. Khun Sujin 
answered: 

"Now there is visible object. There can be understanding of it as only visible 
object. One learns to begin to separate the eye-door from the mind-door. Visible 
object is just a reality. By understanding this one can take away the idea of 
something in it. When one begins to develop understanding there is no 
distinction between nåma and rúpa, they are all mixed up. Then there cannot be 

----------------------- Page 86-----------------------

                                           86 

elimination of the idea of self from any reality. By developing understanding of 
realities one at a time one can learn that the reality which experiences now is 
just an element, that it is a reality different from visible object which is seen. If 
one understands this one will learn that there is nobody who experiences, and 
nobody, no thing in the visible object. It takes time to have clear understanding 
of visible object, seeing, sound, hearing, of all realities appearing through the six 
doorways. 

When we notice people we can remember that this is the same as looking into a 
mirror, since only visible object is experienced and there are no people. We only 
make up our stories about people. We begin to see that it is visible object, not a 
thing or a person. Is this not a beginning of understanding of the nature of 
anattå of visible object?" 

Khun Sujin pointed out several times during the discussions that when one sees 
the value of right understanding it can condition instant awareness. We may say 
that we see the value of right understanding but do we really mean it? The 
following sutta can remind us of what is most valuable in life. We read in the 
"Dialogues of the "Buddha" (Dígha Nikåya III, The Recital, VI, 18): 

Six unsurpassable experiences, namely: certain sights, certain things heard, 
certain gains, certain trainings, certain ministries, certain recollections. 

This passage is short but deep in meaning and it will be explained further on. 
Unsurpassable experiences are experiences which are superior, most valuable. 
The Påli term used here is "anuttariya ". Khun Sujin explained the meaning of the 
six "anuttariyas" in the Bovornives Temple and quoted the "Manorathapúraní", 
the commentary to the Anguttara Nikåya (commentary to the Book of the Ones, 
Ch XIII). This commentary deals with the six anuttariyas. 

The first unsurpassable experience is the unsurpassable experience of sight 
(dassana). Ånanda had this experience because he saw the Buddha the whole 
day and he had developed rightunderstanding and attained enlightenment. If 

----------------------- Page 87-----------------------

                                         87 

someone sees the Buddha but he does not develop right understanding he does 
not have the unsurpassable experience of sight. He does not really value the 
Buddha and his teaching. The commentary states that the other enlightened 
disciples and also the "noble persons" (kaliyåna puggala), namely those who 
developed the eightfold Path, had the unsurpassable experience of sight. We 
cannot see the Buddha now but we can apply what he said to Vakkali who was 
attached to the sight of him (Theragåthå205). The Buddha said: "Who sees the 
Dhamma sees me". 

As to the unsurpassable hearing (savana), Ånanda heard the Buddha preach and 
developed right understanding so that he could attain enlightenment. The same 
is said with regard to the other enlightened disciples and all those who 
developed the eightfold Path. They listened and developed satipaììhåna so that 
they could attain enlightenment. When we listen to the Dhamma now and we 
begin to develop satipaììhåna we can have the unsurpassable hearing. We can 
come to realize that the explanation of the Dhamma is the most precious thing 
that can be heard. 

What is the most precious gain (låbha)? Everybody wants excellent things, but if 
there is no wisdom one does not know whether one's possessions are really 
superior. Those who had strong confidence in the Buddha, like Ånanda, had the 
best of gains. The same is said about the other enlightened disciples and the 
noble persons who developed the eightfold Path. We find the things which give 
us pleasant feeling most valuable in our life. However, the teachings remind us 
that pleasant feeling is very temporary, that clinging to pleasant objects leads to 
sorrow. When we have enough confidence in the teachings we shall continue to 
develop right understanding of all realities which appear. We shall see that it is 
most valuable to know our defilements, to have less ignorance about realities. 
Then we shall have the best of gains.As to the trainings (sikkhå) which are 
superior, these are the higher síla, the higher samådhi and higher wisdom of the 
eightfold Path. Ånanda and the other disciples of the Buddha valued these three 
trainings as unsurpassable, since they lead to the eradication of defilements. If 
we consider them as unsurpassable we shall not be neglectful, we shall be aware 
of any reality which appears, pleasant or unpleasant, kusala or akusala. 

The unsurpassable ministry (påricariya) is the ministry to the Buddha, as Ånanda 

----------------------- Page 88-----------------------

                                        88 

and the other disciples performed. Through satipaììhåna they had acquired the 
greatest confidence and respect for the high qualities of the Buddha who taught 
the truth of impermanence, dukkha and anattå. Without right understanding the 
ministry to the Buddha is not an unsurpassable experience. The Buddha has 
passed away but we can still serve the Dhamma. One ministers to the Dhamma 
when one studies it and explains it to others so that they too can develop right 
understanding. 

The unsurpassable recollection (anussata) is the recollection of the Buddha's 
qualities, those which are "worldly" (lokiya) as well as those which are 
supramundane (lokuttara), the commentary states. Without wisdom one cannot 
recollect the qualities of the Buddha. When we are mindful of nåma and rúpa we 
value the Buddha's wisdom at that moment. Without his teaching we could not 
develop satipaììhåna. Thus at that moment there is the sixth unsurpassable 
experience. 

Khun Sujin said that enlightenment cannot be attained without these six most 
excellent experiences. If we do not consider the Dhamma as that which is most 
valuable in our life, enlightenment cannot be attained. We value the Dhamma 
not merely by words, but by applying it, by developing right understanding. 
When we listen to the Dhamma, consider what we heard and begin to be aware 
of realities we can verify the truth of what the Buddha taught. Then we can gain 
more confidence to develop all the "perfections", the good qualities the Buddha 
had developed together with right understanding during aeons. Ånanda and the 
other disciples had developed the perfections during aeons and when they met 
the Buddha and listened to him it was the right time for them to attain 
enlightenment. 

Khun Sujin's words at the end of your tape were a good reminder: 

"In order to come to the moment of enlightenment all kinds of realities must be 
thoroughly understood. Then there can be the moment of awareness which 
conditions enlightenment. If there is not enough development, have more 
development!" 

----------------------- Page 89-----------------------

                                                                            89 

 With mettå, 

Nina 

********* 

----------------------- Page 90-----------------------

                                          90 

 Letter about Vipassanå8 

the Hague, 

June 29, 1991 

Dear Robert, 

 You have understood that the eightfold Path the Buddha taught is the Middle 
Way. The Buddha said in Isipatana to the five disciples that two extremes should 
not be followed: devotion to sense pleasures and devotion to self-mortification 
(Kindred Sayings V, Mahå-vagga, Book XII, Ch II). We may understand in theory 
that we have to follow the Middle Way, but when it comes to the practice doubts 
may arise. Should we do particular things in order to have more awareness and 
should we avoid things which seem unfavorable for the development of 
satipaììhåna? We may do wholesome deeds such as performing generosity or 
helping others, but still, attachment, lobha, aversion, dosa, and ignorance, moha, 
arise time and again, and sati seldom arises. We may become discouraged about 
our lack of progress. You have understood that satipaììhåna should be developed 
naturally, in daily life, but, as you wrote, you have doubts whether you should 
avoid certain situations. 

You mentioned that you had doubts whether you should accept an invitation 
from your friends to go to the movies or whether you should stay home in order 
to study Dhamma. You feel that accepting is indulgence in pleasure. Nevertheless 
you find that, even while watching the movie, you would have the opportunity to 
face the present reality. I will quote from your letter: 

"Although I have at home the opportunity to study the Dhamma, perhaps there 
will be a feeling of "my practice", "my síla", so that the benefits may not be high. 
Whereas if I would accept I would lose the study time but there is less chance of 
developing attachment to "my practice" and really just as much time to observe 
the present moment. Of course, as paññå develops one may naturally not have 

----------------------- Page 91-----------------------

                                          91 

any desire to see a movie and then one would decline anyway. I do, however, 
believe that there are more conditions for developing kusala cittas if one stays 
home. I guess that the answer to this is that the practice is not so much to 
accumulate many kusala cittas but rather to develop understanding which 
recognizes the different characteristics of all rúpas and nåmas and sees them as 
anattå, including sati and paññå." 

The answer to this dilemma is that one never knows beforehand which type of 
citta arises at which moment, kusala citta or akusala citta. Only the anågåmí, the 
person who has realised the third stage of enlightenment, will never indulge in 
sense pleasures. He will have no inclination to go to movies. For us it is different. 
Sometimes we shall accept an invitation to go to the movies, sometimes we shall 
decline and the cittas arising in both cases can be kusala or akusala, nobody can 
predict that. We can also accept an invitation because of kindness, out of 
consideration for someone else who may not be able to go alone. How could one 
prescribe citta what to decide? Each citta arisesbecause of its own conditions, it 
is anattå, beyond control. 

Sometimes while watching a movie mindfulness of realities can arise, but this 
depends on the accumulated understanding. There can be study with awareness 
of visible object, that which appears through the eyes. When we are absorbed in 
the story we are thinking of concepts. The thinking is conditioned by seeing. 
When we stay home in order to study the Dhamma there may not be any 
awareness at all, how could it be planned? Perhaps we fall asleep or there may 
be distractions. As you say, there can always be attachment to "my practice", but 
this is a conditioned nåma and it can be realized as such. 

You have understood that our goal should not be merely the accumulation of 
kusala but rather the understanding of all realities, sati and paññå included, as 
anattå. When we try to induce sati by doing particular things we shall never see 
that it is anattå. Someone wrote that a teacher said to his pupils that there 
should be continuous mindfulness. However, this is not realistic. We cannot help 
seeing and hearing time and again, these cittas just arise, whether we want it or 
not. Seeing and hearing arise in processes of cittas and in these processes there 
are, shortly after seeing or hearing has fallen away, kusala cittas or akusala 

----------------------- Page 92-----------------------

                                                   92 

cittas, but most of the time akusala cittas. Often we may not pay attention to 
seeing or hearing, they just pass. Also the akusala cittas which arise shortly after 
seeing and hearing just pass, we do not notice them. Cittas arise and fall away 
very rapidly. Therefore, it is hard to know whether the citta at this moment is 
kusala or akusala. You were wondering about the types of citta which arise when 
you are absorbed in a Dhamma subject. Nobody else can tell you, you have to 
find out yourself. When you study the Dhamma in order to understand realities 
there are kusala cittas, but also akusala cittas are bound to arise. When you 
study the Dhamma there are also seeing and hearing, and you have to find out 
whether kusala cittas or akusala cittas arise after seeing or hearing, which are 
vipåkacittas, results of kamma. There is likely to be clinging to seeing, to visible 
object, to concepts we form up on account of what was seen. We believe that we 
do not particularly like what is seen, but we are still attached to all objects. We 
are attached to all the familiar things around us, to books, paper and pen, to the 
chair we are sitting in. However, when we study the Dhamma we can be 
reminded to be aware of whatever reality appears. Then we do not forget the 
goal of our study: to understand what appears now. 

You write that you are inclined to slip off the Middle Way. We all do, so long as 
we are not sotåpannas. I quote from your letter: 

"I am inclined to think, 'Well, the accumulations to enjoy are there. I might as 
well indulge as long as I know it is not self doing it, just desire arising'. But often 
I find that by going ahead and enjoying, somehow there is little awareness and 
more attachment. On the other hand, by suppressing the desire, such as by 

                                 14 
taking the eight precepts   , a feeling of discomfort may be present. But this has 
the benefit of marking the defilement in a clear way." 

Again, we cannot set any rule for citta what to decide to do at a particular 
moment. When we listen to the teachings and consider them we learn about 
kusala and akusala. When we begin to be aware we come to realize that there 

14 
  Laypeople can, in addition to the five precepts, take three more precepts on special days such as the full moon 
day. These include not eating after midday, not using high and soft beds or chairs, not using adornments or 
perfumes. 

----------------------- Page 93-----------------------

                                          93 

are many moments of akusala we did not know of before we studied the 
Dhamma. We also learn about many different ways of kusala we had not thought 
of before. When understanding, paññå, develops it will see more often the 
disadvantage of akusala and the benefit of kusala. When we give in to enjoyment 
and think, "It is not self", it may be thinking with akusala citta or with kusala 
citta. When there is no sati and paññå we can use the thought of not self as an 
excuse not to develop kusala. On the other hand when sati and paññå arise and 
there is awareness of desire as a conditioned reality, not self, the citta is kusala. 

You find that the eight precepts bring you discomfort. Nobody else can tell you 
to take them or not to take them. We should find out what the cittas are like 
which decide to take them. Do we cling to our own kusala, do we want to be 
perfect immediately? You may find that you notice your attachment to a soft 
chair or a soft bed more clearly when you take the eight precepts, but what 
about attachment after seeing or hearing now? Should we not find out about this 
so that we have less ignorance? Sincerity is indispensable for the development of 
satipaììhåna. One has to be truthful with regard to the different cittas which 
arise, be they akusala or kusala. We need sati-sampajañña, sati and paññå, so 
that we shall know whether there is at this moment kusala citta or akusala citta. 
There are different levels of sati-sampajaññå, which is often translated as "clear 
comprehension". Knowing kusala as kusala and akusala as akusala is one level of 
sati-sampajañña. If one wants to develop kusala one has to know whether the 
citta at this moment is kusala or akusala. If sati-sampajañña does not arise it 
cannot be known. If one wants to develop samatha one needs sati-sampajañña 
which knows whether there is kusala citta with calm, conditioned by the 
meditation subject of samatha. Sati-sampajañña in vipassanå realizes nåma as 
nåma and rúpa as rúpa, it realizes them as not self. Sati-sampajañña of vipassanå 
is supported by the other levels of sati-sampajañña, by sati-sampajañña which 
realizes kusala as kusala and akusala as akusala, and which sees the 
disadvantage of akusala and the benefit of kusala. On the other hand, sati- 
sampajañña of vipassanå supports all levels of kusala. 

Sati-sampajañña can be developed by listening to the Dhamma and by 
considering it. Moreover, all other kinds of kusala have to be developed as well, 
since the goal is the eradication of defilements. Therefore, it is necessary to have 

----------------------- Page 94-----------------------

                                          94 

a finer discrimination of kusala and akusala in our daily life. If we learn about 
nåma and rúpa but we neglect generosity we will keep on clinging to the self. It 
is difficult to develop generosity when a great dealof stinginess has been 
accumulated, but we should get to know our true accumulations. When we 
notice stinginess we do not like it, we have aversion about it. Or there is regret, 
kukkucca, about our akusala or about the kusala we omitted, andthat is also 
akusala. When there is an opportunity for the arising of sati-sampajañña there is 
no aversion, no regret. Sati-sampajañña can realize the characteristic of 
stinginess as only a conditioned reality, a type of nåma. There can be more 
understanding of its conditions: it arises because it is so deeply accumulated. We 
do not want to be stingy, we may tell ourselves not to be stingy, not to speak 
words which express our stinginess, but stinginess still arises. We can learn from 
such situations. Instead of us being discouraged, sati-sampajañña can arise and 
see the disadvantage of akusala, and at that moment there cannot be aversion 
about it. There should be sati-sampajañña which realizes how often there is 
conceit in our relationship to others. We may feel displeased about what 
someone else is doing to us or saying to us. There is a kind of comparing, there is 
"he" and "me"; we wonder, "How can he do that to me." Then there is conceit, we 
cling to "our important personality". Conceit hinders generosity and mettå. Can 
we forgive someone else easily? Forgiving is a kind of generosity, dåna. It is 
"abhaya-dåna", the wish that someone else is free from harm. We should more 
often consider the benefit of forgiving, it helps us to have less conceit. 

We may be inclined to blame someone else, we may want to tell him off. 
However, when sati-sampajañña arises we shall investigate our own cittas and 
then we shall be less inclined to blame someone else. We read in the "Gradual 
Sayings" (Book of the Tens, Ch V, par. 4, At Kusinåra) that the Buddha, while he 
was staying at Kusinåra, said that a monk who desires to admonish another 
monk should do so after investigation of five conditions in himself and setting up 
five conditions in himself. We read that he should investigate whether he 
practises utter purity in body and speech, whether he has mettåestablished 
towards his fellow monks and is free from malice. If not, people around him will 
say that he should practise these things himself. We then read: 

----------------------- Page 95-----------------------

                                           95 

Then again, monks, a monk who desires to admonish another should thus 
investigate: Am I or am I not one who has heard much, who bears in mind what 
he has heard, who hoards up what he has heard? Those teachings which, lovely 
alike at the beginning, the middle and the end, proclaim in the spirit and in the 
letter the all-fulfilled, utterly purified Brahma-life, have such teachings been 
much heard by me, borne in mind, practised in speech, pondered in the heart 
and rightly penetrated by view? Is this quality manifest in me or is it not? Then, 
monks, if he be not one who has heard much... if those teachings have not been 
rightly penetrated by view, then folk are found to say to him: "Come now, let 
your reverence complete knowledge of the Sayings." Folk are found to speak 
thus. 

We then read that the monk who desires to admonish another monk should 
investigate whether he is well-trained in the discipline. After that we read about 
five conditions which he has to set up in himself: 

(He considers:) Do I speak in season or not? Do I speak of facts or not, gently or 
harshly, do I speak words fraught with profit or not, with a kindly heart or 
inwardly malicious? These five conditions he must set up in his own self. 

We can apply this sutta in daily life. When there is sati-sampajaññait can be 
realized whether these conditions are fulfilled or not. It is very difficult to fulfill 
them, and when we see that, we may rather refrain from admonishing someone 
else. When we really consider this sutta it can condition the development of 
sati-sampajañña which knows the disadvantage of akusala and the benefit of 
kusala. Then kusala citta can arise because it becomes one's nature. There is no 
need to impose rules upon oneself or to go to particular places in order to induce 
kusala. Someone wrote that one should try to put as much kusala in one's mind 
as one can. In that case there could be an idea of self who is trying and one will 
certainly fail. The same person was in a meditation center and he was hoping 
that he, in that place, could have more mettå. However, he noticed that he could 
not. It shows that realities are beyond control, anattå. It can be discouraging to 

----------------------- Page 96-----------------------

                                        96 

see how little mettåthere is in a day. We used to take for mettå what is only 
attachment. We were inclined to be kind to particular people only, not just to 
anybody we met. But it is helpful to realize that often attachment and conceit 
hinder mettå. 

We should consider all kinds of kusala and akusala which arise in the situation of 
our daily life. You said that you used to separate your meditation life from daily 
life, but, as you know now, that is not the Middle Way. When we would just be 
sitting in a quiet room how could we know ourselves as we are in our daily life, 
in our work situation, in our relationship with others? We should be truthful and 
we should not pretend, even to ourselves, to be better than we really are. 

The word meditation can create confusion. People associate meditation with 
going apart and trying to concentrate on something special. If one wants to 
cultivate calm to the degree of jhåna one has to live a secluded life and one has 
to use a meditation subject of samatha in order to make calm grow. For the 
development of vipassanå one does not need to go apart. One should develop it 
naturally, in daily life. One should come to know one's real accumulations, one's 
defilements. If one does not develop understanding of whatever reality appears 
paññå cannot grow. You asked what the difference is between paññå in samatha 
and paññå in vipassanå. The aims and thus also the methods to reach them are 
different. As regards samatha, even people before the Buddha's time saw the 
danger of sense impressions. They realized that seeing, hearing and the other 
sense impressions are often followed by defilements. Therefore, they used 
subjects of meditation in order to reach jhåna, because at the moment of jhåna- 
citta there cannot be any sense impressions. By means of jhåna defilements are 
temporarily subdued but not eradicated. The aim of vipassanå is the eradication 
of defilements through the wisdom which knows all realities as they are. The 
object of vipassanå is the nåma or rúpa which appears right now. The object is 
not a person, a body or another concept, it is a paramattha dhamma, a nåma or a 
rúpa. The meditation subjects of samatha can be concepts but they can also be 
paramattha dhammas such as the elements. However, the aim is not to realize 
them as not self, but the aim is to have less attachment to them. In vipassanå the 
object changes from moment to moment, since it is the reality appearing at the 
present moment. One never knows what will appear next. It is different in 

----------------------- Page 97-----------------------

                                         97 

samatha since one has to develop calm with a meditation subject in order to 
reach calm to the degree of jhåna. One may not have the accumulated skill to 
develop calm to the degree of jhåna. However, one can also develop calm in 
daily life, naturally, as the occasion arises. For example, when there is sati- 
sampajañña which knows the characteristic of mettå, mettå can naturally arise in 
daily life, without the need to think, "I should have more mettå". There can also 
be a moment of satipaììhåna when one realizes for example mettå as a 
conditioned reality, a type of nåma which is not self. Moments of calm and 
moments of vipassanå can arise naturally in daily life, but it all depends on 
sati-sampajañña. As we have seen, there are different levels of sati-sampajañña 
and they are all beneficial. 

In order to have right understanding of nåma and rúpa there should be 
awareness of whatever reality appears through one of the six doors. This is very 
difficult and therefore you wonder whether in the beginning it would not be 
better to be aware of only what appears, for example, through the body-door. 
Should one not limit the object of awareness? You find that some suttas seem to 
suggest this. You quote the story of Pothila from the Dhammapada commentary 
(282, commentary to verse 282). A novice who was an arahat instructed the 
monk Pothila by way of a simile. If there are six holes in an anthill and a lizard 
enters the anthill by one of these holes, one could catch the lizard by stopping up 
five of these holes, leaving the sixth one open. Then he could catch the lizard in 
the hole by which he entered. In the same way should Pothila deal with the six 
doors of the senses and the mind; he should close five of the six doors, and 
devote his attention to the door of the mind. We then read that he was mindful 
of the body and began mind development. After hearing a stanza from the 
Buddha he attained arahatship. It was the following stanza: 

From meditation springs wisdom, 

From lack of meditation wisdom dwindles away. 

He that knows this twofold path of gain and loss 

Should so settle himself that wisdom may increase. 

----------------------- Page 98-----------------------

                                          98 

When wisdom has reached perfection one will not be shaken anymore by gain 
and loss and the other worldly conditions. 

What will happen if one tells oneself that one now will concentrate on only one 
doorway, such as the body-door? Then there would not be awareness of the 
reality which appears, but there is an idea of self who sets his mind on one 
object, who selects the object of awareness. He thinks of it and tries to 
concentrate on it. While he tries to control sati he will not know that each reality 
arises because of its own conditions, that it is beyond control. Some texts seem 
to stress the body, other texts emphasize feeling or other realities. Why is that? 
This is only to remind us not to be forgetful of the realities which appear. When 
there is mindfulness of hardness which appears through the bodysense one 
should study it with awareness in order to know that it is only a kind of rúpa, not 
"my body". There is also the nåma which experiences the hardness, or the nåma 
which feels. If one applies oneself to the "Application of Mindfulness of the Body" 
it does not mean that one should be aware only of rúpa. If one neglects nåma 
which appears one will continue to cling to an idea of self who experiences 
objects. One should know that it is only an element which experiences, not self. 
The first stage of insight is knowing the difference between the characteristic of 
nåma and the characteristic of rúpa. Thus, both nåma and rúpa which appear 
should be studied with awareness. It depends on conditions whether there is 
more often awareness of hardness, of visible object, of feeling, or of any other 
reality. This is different for different people. However, we should not deliberately 
limit the object of awareness, we should not set any rule, because that is desire 
and this hinders right awareness. 

Eventually all objects appearing through the six doors have to be known. Pothila 
could not have attained arahatship had he been ignorant of particular objects. 
Some people have the inclination to develop both samatha and vipassanå. In the 
development of samatha one subdues attachment to sense objects. However, in 
order to develop insight there must be understanding of all nåmas and rúpas 
which appear. At the moment of mindfulness of the objects appearing through 
the six doors there is "restraint of the senses" (indriya saóvara síla). At that 
moment there are no conditions for akusala on account of what appears through 
the senses. 

----------------------- Page 99-----------------------

                                                   99 

We may think that some suttas stress only one object as object of awareness, but 
it is important to read all texts. We read, for example, in the "Kindred Sayings" 
(V, Mahå-vagga, Kindred Sayings on the Way, Ch III, Par. 9, Feeling) that the 
Buddha, while he was at Såvatthí, said to the monks: 

There are these three feelings, monks. What three? Feeling that is pleasant, 
feeling that is painful, feeling that is neither pleasant nor painful. These are the 
three feelings. 

In order to comprehend these three feelings, monks, the ariyan eightfold way 
must be cultivated.... 

It is difficult to know the true characteristic of feeling, to know it as nåma, 
different from rúpa. Don't we confuse bodily feeling and rúpa such as hardness 
which impinges on the bodysense? There is feeling all the time but we neglect 
awareness of it, we cling to feeling and take it for self. This sutta can remind us 
to be mindful of feeling. The following sutta (par. 10) reminds us to be aware of 
the sense objects. We read that the Buddha explained to Uttiya about the "five 
sensual elements". The Buddha said: 

There are objects cognizable by the eye, objects desirable, pleasant, delightful 
and dear, passion-fraught, inciting to lust. There are sounds cognizable by the 
ear, objects desirable... there are scents cognizable by the nose... savours 
cognizable by the tongue... tangibles cognizable by the body, objects desirable, 
pleasant, delightful and dear, passion fraught, inciting to lust. These, Uttiya, are 
the five sensual elements of which I spoke. 

Now, Uttiya, in order to abandon these five sensual elements the ariyan eightfold 

                               15 
way must be cultivated   . 

It is not possible to try to achieve straight away detachment from the five sense 

15 
  The P.T.S. translation has: it is by abandoning these five sensual elements that the ariyan eightfold way is to be 
cultivated, but this is not correct. I follow the Thai translation. 

----------------------- Page 100-----------------------

                                          100 

objects. Detachment can only be achieved by right understanding which realizes 
these objects as they are. One has to begin to be mindful of whatever object 
appears through one of the six doors so that understanding can gradually 
develop. First the clinging to self has to be eradicated and it is only at the third 
stage of enlightenment that attachment to sense objects is eradicated. 

You asked how we can learn to discern the difference between nåma and rúpa, 
and in particular the difference between bodily phenomena and the experience 
of bodily phenomena, since that is so difficult. Is there again an idea of self who 
can select phenomena in order to be aware of them? We know that the 
difference between nåma and rúpa should be distinguished, but the objects of 
awareness should not be selected. We are ignorant of all phenomena which 
appear. Do we know visible object as it is, seeing as it is, feeling as it is? When 
visible object appears it can be object of awareness so that right understanding of 
it can be developed. Right understanding can realize visible object as rúpa, 
different from nåma. After a moment of awareness of visible object, it is not 
necessary to be aware of seeing in order to realize the difference between nåma 
and rúpa; we cannot direct sati to particular nåmas and rúpas. After awareness 
of visible object, sati may be aware of feeling or of sound; sati is non-self, anattå. 
When the first stage of insight knowledge arises, the difference between the 
nåma and the rúpa which appear is clearly known; the objects of awareness are 
not necessarily seeing and visible object or hearing and sound. The objects of 
awareness are any kind of rúpa which appears and any kind of nåma which 
appears, there is no selection of objects, there is no idea that they would have to 
appear in a particular order. When we worry about how we can know the 
difference between a particular kind of nåma and a particular kind ofrúpa we are 
not developing understanding. Thus, there is no prescription one could follow so 
that one could find out the difference between nåma and rúpa. It all depends on 
the development of sati-sampajañña. 

While we were in India Khun Sujin said that if one does not know the 
characteristic of sati it cannot be developed. On the other hand, only when sati 
arises can we know its characteristic. It seems like a vicious circle.Khun Sujin 
said time and again, "Develop it now". We were wondering how we could. The 
answer is that through the study of the teachings, through considering them, 

----------------------- Page 101-----------------------

                                           101 

through asking questions, intellectual understanding is gradually built up. These 
factors are conditions for right awareness of realities which appear. We need 
patience to listen and consider again and again, we should have no desire for the 
arising of sati. Khun Sujin said: "If there is no desire for sati it will arise, I 
guarantee." Why do we discuss visible object time and again? In order to be 
reminded to consider it with awareness. When we see, we think immediately of 
the people and the things around us, because we always did this. However, we 
can remember that what appears through the eyes is only visible object. We need 
to discuss many realities, and then, if there is no selection of particular objects, 
there will be conditions for gradually understandingthe nature of rúpa and of 
nåma. We may believe that it is sufficient to be aware of visible object just a few 
times in order to know what it is. This is not enough. Visible object is in front of 
us but we are often forgetful of it. We do not have to think about it, it is there 
and it appears through the eyes. We cannot see sound, we can only see what 
impinges on the eyesense, visible object. There can be conditions to study with 
awareness nåma and rúpa, if we see that it is beneficial to have less ignorance of 
realities. There is also the reality which experiences visible object. It is not self, it 
is only an element which experiences. We often lose opportunities to study the 
objects which are there, every day. We have to continue to study all realities 
which appear through all the doorways. There should just be awareness of the 
reality which appears, through one doorway at a time, and we should not think 
or worry about it whether it is nåma or rúpa. At the moment of worry or doubt 
there is no awareness, the citta is akusala. We should know that enlightenment 
cannot be attained by developing satipaììhåna only during one life-time. 
Awareness of realities is a new accumulation which is gradually acquired. We 
read in the "Gradual Sayings" (Book of the Threes,Ch XIV, par. 131, Fighting- 
man) that a fighting-man has three qualities: he is a far-shooter, a shooter like 
lightning and a piercer of huge objects. A monk who is worthy of respect should 
have these three qualities. We read: 

Now, in what way is a monk a far-shooter? 

Herein, whatsoever rúpa... feeling... perception (saññå)...activity 
(saòkhårakkhandha)... whatsoever consciousness he has, be it past, present or 

----------------------- Page 102-----------------------

                                          102 

future, personal or external to self, be it gross or subtle, mean or exalted, far or 
near,- everything in short of which he is conscious,- he sees it as it really is by 
right insight thus: This is not mine. This am I not. This is not for me the Self. 
That is how a monk is "a far-shooter". 

The five khandhas, all conditioned rúpas and nåmas should be realized as they 
are. We then read that the monk is a shooter like lightning when he understands 
the four noble Truths: dukkha, its arising, its ceasing and the Way leading to its 
ceasing. He is a piercer of huge objects when he pierces through the huge mass 
of ignorance. 

If one wants to learn the art of shooting with bow and arrow one has to have 
endless patience and perseverance to learn this skill. Evenso one needs great 
patience and perseverance to develop satipaììhåna. It has to be learnt without an 
idea of self who is training. The right conditions have to be there in order to be 
able to develop right understanding. The person who shoots from far and can hit 
the aim very precisely is like the person who has developed paññå which has 
become so keen that it can realize the true nature of the reality which appears. 
Paññå is as swift as lightning and it can pierce through the huge mass of 
ignorance. Since ignorance is a mass accumulated for aeons it cannot be 
eradicated within a short time. 

************** 

With mettå, 

Nina 

----------------------- Page 103-----------------------

                                        103 

Letter about Vipassanå9 

the Hague, 

 July 29, 1991 

Do we really want to be aware of attachment, lobha, when it appears? We may 
know that whatever reality appears can be object of awareness, but how is the 
application of this knowledge? We dislike our defilements and we would rather 
be free from them, but we forget that the only way to eventually eliminate them 
is to be aware of them so that they are known as they are. We read in "As it was 
said" (Khuddaka Nikåya, Itivuttaka, The Ones, Ch I, par. 9) that the Buddha said: 

"Monks, the man who does not understand and comprehend lust, who has not 
detached his mind therefrom, who has not abandoned lust, can make no growth 
in extinguishing dukkha. But, monks, he who does understand and comprehend 
lust, who has detached his mind therefrom, who has abandoned lust, can make 
growth in extinguishing dukkha." 

This is the meaning of what the Exalted One said. Herein this meaning is thus 
spoken. 

By whatsoever lust inflamed 

Beings to the ill-bourn go, 

That lust, completely knowing it, 

Those who have insight do reject. 

Rejecting it, no more again 

They come unto this world at all. 

This meaning also was spoken by the Exalted One; so I have heard. 

The same is said about ill-will, delusion, wrath, and spite. One may believe that 

----------------------- Page 104-----------------------

                                          104 

defilements can be abandoned without thoroughly knowing them, but this is 
impossible. Is there not a tendency to flee from one's defilements instead of 
facing them with courage and sincerity? So long as there is ignorance our 
defilements are hidden, they are covered up. When we listen to the Dhamma and 
consider it, and when we begin to be aware we come to know more and more 
the defilements which were hidden to us before. We come to know our true 
accumulations. As we read in the sutta, they can only be eliminated by knowing 
them with insight. So long as they are taken for self they can never be 
eradicated. 

Sarah sent me some tapes which were recorded in Bangkok with discussions 
about the development of right understanding. These discussions were held in 
Khun Sujin's house and also during a trip to Kanchanaburi. Sarah said that many 
people want to change their character, that they want to become a better person. 
There is so much quarreling in daily life and people become disappointed when 
their life does not change for the better after they have listened to the Dhamma. 
They hope to be able to change themselves in a meditation center if they work 
very hard at it. Khun Sujin remarked that the cittas which quarrel are anattå , 
not self, that they arise because of conditions. Right understanding can see that 
there is nobody at that moment. There is only nåma which experiences and even 
the words are motivated by such and such realities, they do not belong to 
anybody. Sarah said that one's aim may be a quiet, peaceful life without quarrels. 
Khun Sujin explained that there is a lack of understanding at which stage 
quarreling will be eradicated. In fact dosa is only eradicated at the third stage of 
enlightenment, the stage of the "non-returner", the anågåmí. Khun Sujin said: 

"Instead of minding too much about different defilements one could develop 
understanding of realities, so that all akusala will become less. Ignorance which 
is the cause of all akusala will be eliminated by right understanding. Maybe one 
is just satisfied to have less quarreling, and there is no development of 
understanding, no elimination of ignorance, but that depends on one's 
inclinations." 

----------------------- Page 105-----------------------

                                             105 

Several of the discussions were about going to a meditation center since many 
people believe that that is beneficial. They think that it is helpful to be away 
from people. They should find out whether that is their nature and whether it 
helps them to become more detached, to have less clinging to a result, whether it 
helps them to understand their own accumulations more deeply. Is it not better 
to have a few moments of awareness and understanding without any desire to 
"plan" such moments? Some people believe that an "intensive course" in a center 
can be a short-cut to reach the goal. How can there be a short-cut if there is no 
understanding of this moment? The understanding of this very moment should 
be the test for our progress. Khun Sujin said: 

"One has to understand the very subtle desire, when one is waiting for the 
arising of awareness in the future. Awareness can arise now. If there is 
understanding now it can be accumulated. One has to notice desire, whether it is 
there. Instead of having desire there can be awareness and right understanding 
even now. That is the meaning of the 'Middle Way'. Understanding realities with 
awareness, that is the moment of progress. You think that you can get rid of 
desire, somewhere, at some time, but what about this moment? There is lobha if 
there is no understanding. Desire is not self, it is a reality. If you don't 
understand it, you will not get rid of it. When you look at the newspaper you can 
develop understanding about lobha which is conditioned. You cannot do 
anything about it, but there can be understanding of lobha as a conditioned 
reality." 

Different people will react differently when they hear, "you cannot do anything 
about it", it all depends on the understanding of the listener. It is right 
understanding when we realize that we cannot do anything about the realities 
which arise because of their own conditions. In this way we shall come to 
understand that they are beyond control, anattå. There is wrong understanding if 
one believes that it is senseless to develop kusala and right understanding since 
one cannot do anything about one's defilements. When people speak harsh 
words to us it is beneficial to realize that we cannot do anything about the 
hearing, since it is conditioned already. Hearing is vipåka, the result of kamma. 

----------------------- Page 106-----------------------

                                         106 

As Khun Sujin said, there is nobody there, there is only the experiencing. No self 
hears, it is only a type of nåma, and no self gets hurt by harsh words. When we 
consider this more deeply and there can be awareness of nåma and rúpa, we 
shall be less inclined to retort unpleasant words. We shall have more 
understanding of the truth that there is nobody there. 

Sarah said that it was a relief to know that we do not have to do anything special 
for the development of understanding, such as always reading Dhamma books or 
going to a center. Khun Sujin replied: 

"The idea of self always pushes one this or that way. The development of 
understanding just follows all realities. Then lobha cannot push you to cover up 
the realities which have arisen now because of conditions. Just understand any 
reality which is conditioned. Seeing now is conditioned and therefore it arises, it 
sees. Develop understanding of the reality which is already conditioned." 

Jonothan said that he should have studied the Dhamma more often, that he had 
regret about losing opportunities for study. Khun Sujin replied: 

"While talking about realities the 'perfection' of paññå develops by itself, even if 
we do not name it or talk about the resolution to develop the perfections. You 
would not have come from Hong Kong to have discussions if you did not have 
the determination to develop paññå. Your action shows it. When there is 
awareness arising just for a moment, "slipping in", and then "slipping out", it is 
also the development of the perfection of paññå. Any moment can be a moment 
of developing the perfections. Listening is not always convenient, but one can 
still develop perfections when there is no opportunity for listening or studying." 

We may have regret about lack of study and we may wonder whether we should 
avoid particular situations like going out and enjoying ourselves, in order to have 
more time for study and for consideration of the Dhamma. There is still the idea 
of self which pushes us this way or that way. Instead we should just "follow" all 

----------------------- Page 107-----------------------

                                          107 

realities which appear. Alan Weller wrote a letter to me about this subject which 
I quote: 

"I used to think that I should study the Dhamma and be alone rather than going 
out with friends. When we say this it seems as if there is no self indulgence when 
we do not go to the movies whereas in actual fact defilements are around all the 
time. The stories on the screen are no different from the stories in our everyday 
life. We have pleasant feeling or unpleasant feeling conditioned by what we see, 
no matter whether we are at the movies or not. All situations are the same in the 
sense that they consist of realities which are dukkha (unsatisfactory), anicca 
(impermanent) and anattå (non-self). Pleasant feeling has its own characteristic 
which can be understood, no matter where we are. We cannot force kusala by 
listening more to the Dhamma. Akusala is conditioned by accumulation, we have 
to accept it as it is. By listening to the Dhamma and considering it there are 
conditions for the development of kusala, slowly and gradually. We should 
follow our own accumulations wisely, sincerely, understanding them as they 
really are. I have accumulations to go to the movies, watch T.V. and read 
magazines. The interest in these is a conditioned reality which can be known. 
Also the interest in Dhamma is conditioned. I cannot force myself to have more 
interest in the Dhamma. I understand the value of reading the scriptures and 
considering the Dhamma and that is a condition for studying it. We cannot read 
all day, every day. Therefore it is best to live our life naturally according to our 
own accumulation and to learn to apply Dhamma in any situation. 

Whenever we study the Dhamma there is renunciation, so of course sometimes 
we shall study rather than watch T.V., but are we doing this because of 
renunciation or because of desire? There can so easily be attachment. This 
should be seen as it is, otherwise our studying will be overmuch, too tense, not 
according to our own real nature. The beginning of the study of Dhamma is 
learning to see kusala as kusala and akusala as akusala. We should not force 
ourselves to have more kusala by being in a particular situation. 

To sum up: any time is Dhamma time, but reading, listening to tapes, asking 
questions is valuable. We have to balance our own accumulation with the study 
of Dhamma. Too much going to the movies and we shall neglect reading and 

----------------------- Page 108-----------------------

                                         108 

considering. Too much reading and considering may be forced and too tense. We 
should be easy going, learning to see dhamma as dhamma and realizing the 
danger of too much self indulgence. Attachment is constantly moving us away 
from Dhamma." 

The perfection of truthfulness or sincerity is indispensable for the development of 
paññå. Susie wrote to me that she realized that there are, after seeing, many 
moments of thinking of stories about people and things. She wrote: 

"I certainly see that I get so absorbed that I don't want to hear, read or think 
about Dhamma. I would rather have my lobha and my story. Pretty natural." 

This is sincere. If we try to force ourselves not to be absorbed in stories about 
people and things there is already desire for result. There is the idea of self who 
is "doing something" and then we are on the wrong path. Only if we naturally 
follow all realities, also the moments of being absorbed, we are on the "Middle 
Way", and then understanding can develop. Do we mind what kind of reality 
arises? Do we mind lack of sati? We may think that we do not mind but as 
understanding develops, one knows that one minds a lot. How much or how 
little we mind indicates to what extent understanding has developed. We can 
only find out ourselves. When understanding has developed more it does not 
matter at all which type of reality appears since they are all conditioned. 
Jonothan remarked that he is just as happy to know dosa as to know generosity, 
because in the end all realities have to be known as they are. It is very beneficial 
to be reminded that we should find out how much we mind about the realities 
which appear. It teaches us to become more sincere. Without noticing it we may 
have preference for particular realities and we may neglect being aware of 
certain other realities. We may want to know seeing but we are unhappy about 
the thinking which arises on account of what we saw, and thus we may neglect 
that reality. We dislike dosa, and thus we may neglect that reality when it 
appears. Khun Sujin said: 

----------------------- Page 109-----------------------

                                          109 

"One can benefit from having lobha or dosa. One can see to what extent one has 
accumulated these realities. Isn't it useful? One can see one's akusala. Otherwise 
one could not know how much one has. No one likes it, but instead of disliking it 
why not use it as an opportunity for the development of understanding. It is very 
beneficial to understand akusala in detail. It always arises and it is there, from 
morning to night, but it is not understood as such. Paññå can see akusala as a 
conditioned nåma, so that the idea of self will be eliminated from all akusala of 
all levels. If there is no understanding of akusala how can one know whether one 
has less akusala or more? If there is no understanding of akusala can one say 
that one has developed understanding? " 

Several times during the discussions Khun Sujin pointed out that awareness can 
"slip in" very naturally, and then "slip out", just as naturally as thinking or 
hearing which slip in and out. They come and go and we do not have to do 
anything about these realities, since they arise because of conditions. We should 
understand the nature of anattå of awareness instead of trying to have 
awareness. Are we glad when there is a moment of awareness? That shows our 
clinging. There are many conditions necessary for the arising of awareness, such 
as reading, discussing and considering the characteristic of the reality which 
appears as not self. When we remember that many conditions are necessary we 
shall be less inclined to induce sati. If one tries hard to make awareness arise one 
thinks that there is awareness, but it is not right awareness. We may mistakenly 
think that there is awareness of realities when we are only thinking about 
realities such as softness or the experience of softness. In some meditation 
centers people have to sit for one hour, then walk for one hour, but there is no 
right understanding of the object of awareness. They may hear the teacher say 
that softness is rúpa and that the experience of softness is not self. They learn by 
heart that there are six doorways and they recite for themselves the objects 
which can appear through these doorways. This can be a level of sati since sati 
accompanies each kind of kusala citta, but there is no development of direct 
understanding of the reality appearing at the present moment. Khun Sujin 
stressed again that whenever sati arises it is time to develop understanding. We 
have heard this before, but don't we forget? When paññå is being developed 

----------------------- Page 110-----------------------

                                          110 

there will be less doubt about awareness. We shall be less inclined to think, "Was 
there awareness or was it only thinking?" Khun Sujin said: 

"There is touching many times, but when awareness arises there is the beginning 
of understanding of softness as a reality, or of touching as just a moment of 
experiencing. That moment is not thinking about the idea of softness or thinking 
about touching, because it is the moment of experiencing very naturally, it is the 
moment of developing understanding. There is awareness and understanding 
without any expectation, because it is time to develop understanding when 
awareness is aware, not when you want to be aware. One knows how much 
understanding there is when awareness arises." 

When Sarah asked what the characteristic of visible object is, Khun Sujin gave a 
very meaningful answer which is well worth considering: 

"A reality. Can anybody do something about it at this moment? It appears now, it 
has its own characteristic, nobody can change it." 

Visible object is just a reality, it is not a person or a tree, as we used to think. 
When we hear that it is a reality and that we cannot do anything about it, it 
reminds us of the nature of anattåof visible object. It appears already and 
understanding of it can be naturally developed. It seems that we see immediately 
a chair or a flower, but if there were no thinking could there be any idea about 
visible object? Seeing and thinking arise closely one after the other and gradually 
their different characteristics can be known. 

By developing satipaììhåna one will have a deeper understanding of kamma and 
vipåka. Someone remarked that it is a relief to understand kamma and vipåka, to 
know that things have to happen and that it is of no use to try to control one's 
life. Khun Sujin remarked that when one thinks, "It is kamma, it is vipåka", it is 
not as precise as the direct understanding of kamma and vipåka which is 
acquired through awareness of the realities which appear. We say that seeing 

----------------------- Page 111-----------------------

                                         111 

and hearing are vipåka, but we just repeat what is in the text. Our understanding 
is still superficial. When there is awareness and direct understanding of these 
realities there will be a clearer understanding of what vipåka is. There are 
different stages of insight, vipassanåñåùa, and at each stage paññå realizes the 
nature of the realities which appear more clearly. As paññå develops kamma and 
vipåka will be seen more clearly. While one is developing understanding one 
should not expect clear understanding of realities immediately. Khun Sujin 
remarked that the sharp and keen understanding is the result which will arise 
later, one should not have expectations. One is on the right way and one does 
not mind when and where there will be result, it will arise when it is the right 
time. There can be understanding of seeing right now, one does not have to 
waste time. 

When right understanding is developed in daily life it can condition more 
patience in the different situations. Situations change all the time and life can be 
complicated. We may be overburdened by work or we may have problems 
concerning our relatives. I will quote a conversation about the perfection of 
patience between Khun Sujin and Sarah. 

Khun Sujin: "If there are no difficult situations how does one know that right 
understanding can cope with them, that it can know the different realities which 
appear? When there is moreunderstanding of realities as not self there is more 
patience. When there is patience it can be understood as 'nobody'." 

Sarah: "Is there more patience because one tries less to control realities?" 

Khun Sujin: "There is less attachment to self." 

Sarah: "Will there be less frustration about situations?" 

Khun Sujin: "And also less disturbance while one thinks about other people. One 
understands that there is no permanent being. Sound arises and falls away, it 
does not belong to any one. When people speak the sound is conditioned by the 
nåma-kkhandhas and these also fall away. There is only the thinking of a story 
about people and things all the time. It is the same as when we watch T.V., read 
the newspaper or dream about things. What is seen is only visible object. When 
there is patience one is not disturbed by any circumstances. 

----------------------- Page 112-----------------------

                                           112 

One may be inclined to think of a self who cannot bear anymore such or such 
situation. Patience is a condition not to have aversion. We have to cope with 
many situations. The growth of the perfections must be in daily life, in any 
situation." 

Sarah: "I do not quite understand the perfection of determination or resolution, 
it seems that it is just thinking." 

Khun Sujin: "Thinking and taking action." 

Sarah: "Following the kusala way?" 

Khun Sujin: "When I go to the Bovornives Temple to give lectures or I am 
preparing the tapes for the radio I do not have to think about which perfections I 
am developing. The action shows the perfections. 

It is not self but sankhårakkhandha (the khandha of 'activities' or 'formations') 
which conditions the thinking, 'I will do as much kusala as possible', and also the 
action in accordance with the thinking. Resolution is not only thinking. One 
needs the perfection of sincerity or truthfulness in order to conform one's deeds 
and speech with one's thinking to perform kusala. For example, you have the 
intention to have right speech but when the situation arises for right speech it 
depends on whether you have sincerity to act according to your resolution. 
Sincerity can condition kusala at such a moment. Then you develop kusala not 
for fame, admiration and other selfish motives." 

When we notice the unwholesomeness of someone else we find it difficult to 
have kusala citta. Khun Sujin asked, "When one thinks of Saddam Hussein, what 
type of citta is thinking?" The person who has no understanding about kusala 
and akusala can be object of mettå. When he commits ill deeds he does not know 
that it is akusala. We can have mettå instead of dosa when there is awareness. 
Then we do not follow the opinion of others who dislike such a person. When we 
have aversion about someone's bad deeds we accumulate more akusala. 

Khun Sujin had reminded us in India to become like a dustrag which serves for 
wiping the feet. A dustrag takes up filth and is undisturbed by it. One should 
become as humble as a dustrag. Såriputta, who could forgive anybody, no matter 

----------------------- Page 113-----------------------

                                         113 

whether that person treated him in an unjust manner, compared himself with a 
dustrag. He had no conceit. When right understanding has been developed one 
will cling less to the self, there will be more humbleness. During the discussions 
Khun Sujin said again: 

"I would like to be a dustrag. I follow the way to be one, it is my resolution. Our 
resolution means that we take action by developing understanding and mettå." 

It is beneficial to be reminded again of the dustrag, becausehumbleness seems to 
go against our nature. As understanding develops it must lead to letting go of 
nåmas and rúpas. What we take for self are only impermanent nåmas and 
rúpas.When their impermanence has been realized can they be as important as 
before? 

We read in the "Vinaya" (VI, Parivåra, Ch XII, The Lesser Collection, 163) how 
the monk should behave while approaching the Sangha when it is convened for 
the investigation of a legal question. We read: 

... he should approach the Order with a humble mind, with a mind as though it 
were removing dust. He should be skilled about seats and skilled about sitting 
down. He should sit down on a suitable seat without encroaching on (the space 
intended for) monks who are Elders and without keeping newly ordained monks 
from a seat. He should not talk in a desultory fashion, nor about inferior 
(worldly) matters. Either he should speak Dhamma himself or should ask 
another to do so, or he should not disdain the ariyan silence... 

The commentary (the Samantapåsådika) adds to "with a mind as though it were 
removing dust": "like a towel for wiping the feet." The Vinaya contains many 
useful reminders about behaviour which laypeople can apply too in their own 
situation. Some people believe that when they do not harm or hurt others by bad 
deeds such as killing or stealing, they have good síla. However, should we not 
know the akusala cittas which arise in the different situations of our daily life? 

----------------------- Page 114-----------------------

                                        114 

Should we not see the danger of the slighter degrees of akusala, since we keep 
on accumulating it from life to life? It is important to know our akusala more in 
detail, even when we perform seemingly unimportant actions. When we are in a 
hurry to take a seat in bus or train, is the citta kusala or akusala? Do we speak 
about others in a desultory way? Through awareness we can be more careful in 
our actions and speech, we can become more considerate. Further on in this 
section of the Vinaya we read: 

... he should not speak waving his arms about, he should be unhastening, he 
should be considerate, he should not be quick tempered, with a mind of loving 
kindness he should be gentle in speech; merciful, he should be compassionate for 
welfare; seeking for welfare, he should not be frivolous in speech; limiting his 
speech, he should be one who masters hostility, and is without irascibility. 

When we speak, do we sometimes wave our arms about? We may think that we 
do not harm others by such a gesture, but should we not find out whether there 
is at such moments kusala citta or akusala citta? 

If we want to become like a dustrag all love of self and conceit must eventually 
be eradicated. Right understanding should be developed while we are busy, 
while we are in the company of others. Akusala cittas are bound to arise in our 
dealings with others and also when we are alone, but when akusala citta appears 
we have the opportunity to know akusala as it is. 

We are already disturbed by a loud noise, for example, the noise of traffic or the 
sound of a radio which is too loud. Khun Sujin asked Sarah whether she is 
disturbed by sound and Sarah answered that she is disturbed many times, that it 
conditions dosa. I shall quote the conversation about this subject: 

Khun Sujin: "It depends on understanding, not you, whether hearing can be 
realized as just a moment of experiencing. When dosa appears there must be 
understanding too of the dosa as not self. Understanding has to develop on and 
on, one should not stop with awareness, then one will not come to know the 

----------------------- Page 115-----------------------

                                            115 

dosa as not self." 

Sarah: "After a moment of awareness there is a lot of thinking and aversion." 

Khun Sujin: "That is how one can realize to what extent understanding has been 
developed. The development can be very short, just one moment, or more than 
that." 

Sarah: "Usually one moment." 

Khun Sujin: "That is not enough. One realizes that one has to continue to 
develop understanding." 

There should not be an idea of self who has to continue to develop 
understanding, but knowing that one moment of awareness now and then is not 
enough can condition the continuation of development. There may be awareness 
of sound just for a moment, but, when there is thinking about it with lobha or 
dosa we stop short, and there is forgetfulness. It is helpful to be reminded that 
there are so many realities we are still ignorant of. All realities which appear 
have to be known in order to eliminate the idea of self. It takes more than a 
lifetime, as Khun Sujin often said. 

*********** 

----------------------- Page 116-----------------------

                                          116 

Letter about Vipassanå10 

 the Hague, 

 Oct. 2, 1991 

Our daily life is complicated, we are busy with our work and there are always 
problems which disturb us. It seems that there is very little opportunity for 
wholesome deeds. We believe that we see the value of the Dhamma, but we find 
it hard to apply it. We read in the "Gradual Sayings" (I, Book of the Threes, Ch 
VI, The Bråhmins, par. 51, Two people): 

Now two broken-down old bråhmins, aged, far gone in years, who had reached 
life's end, one hundred and twenty years of age, came to see the Exalted One... 
As they sat at one side those bråhmins said this to the Exalted One: 

"We are bråhmins, master Gotama, old bråhmins, aged, far gone in years... but 
we have done no noble deeds, no meritorious deeds, no deeds that can bring 
assurance to our fears. Let the worthy Gotama cheer us! Let the worthy Gotama 
comfort us, so that it may be a profit and a blessing to us for a long time!" 

"Indeed, you bråhmins are old... but you have done no deeds that can bring 
assurance to your fears. Indeed, bråhmins, this world is swept onward by old 
age, by sickness, by death. Since this is so, self-restraint in body, speech and 
thought (practised) in this life:- let this be refuge, cave of shelter, island of 
defense, resting-place and support for him who has gone beyond. 

Life is swept onward: brief our span of years. 

One swept away by old age has no defence. 

Then keep the fear of death before your eyes, 

And do good deeds that lead to happiness. 

The self-restraint of body, speech and thought 

----------------------- Page 117-----------------------

                                         117 

In this life practised, meritorious deeds, 

these make for happiness when one has died.” 

These two bråhmins were sincere, they realized that there are most of the time 
akusala cittas. Is it not the same for us? There are more often akusala cittas than 
kusala cittas after seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting or the experience of tangible 
object. We are attached to all the sense objects; attachment, lobha, is following 
us like a shadow throughout our lives. If the object which is experienced is 
unpleasant our attachment conditions aversion, dosa. 

Khun Sujin spoke about the sutta on the two old bråhmins in the Bovornives 
Temple, explaining that it deals with our daily life. I would like to quote her 
explanation: 

“Conditions are different for different people. Some people think of themselves 
all the time, they do not do anything for their relatives or friends. From morning 
until night they are busy with their work, making a living for their family, and 
they have to face many problems with regard to their duties. If one does not 
accumulate kusala so that it becomes one's nature, kusala citta will not arise very 
easily. One should accumulate kusala when one is in the company of other 
people, while one is working or while one has free time, otherwise there may not 
be any opportunity for kusala. When one takes a rest after a busy day there is 
likely to be lobha. One clings to self, one looks for pleasure, for distraction. Then 
one thinks that there is no time for kusala. 

The two old bråhmins had faced many problems concerning theirfamilies. 
However, this is the case with all of us. We are bound to have moments that we 
are worried and disturbed. All kinds of problems arise each day. If there are no 
problems concerning our house, our family, or our work, there are numerous 
other occasions for worry. We are worried in this life, but we should remember 
that there was also worry in former lives. These worries belong to the past. 
Evenso the worry in this life cannot stay. There was worry in the past and there 
will also be worry in future lives. One worries about sickness and pain. Also in 
former lives there was worry about sickness, although we do not know from 

----------------------- Page 118-----------------------

                                          118 

which diseases we were suffering. In this life we may have the same diseases or 
other ones we did not have before, but there is worry just as there was in past 
lives during the cycle of birth and death, and there will be worry again in lives to 
come. 

We should not forget to consider again and again eight ‘grounds for a sense of 
urgency’ (Vis. IV, 63): birth, ageing, sickness and death, the sufferings connected 
with unhappy rebirth, the suffering in the past rooted in the cycle of rebirths, the 
suffering in the future rooted in the cycle of rebirths, and the suffering in the 
present rooted in the search for nutriment. 

We cannot remember the sufferings of the past but they are not different from 
those arising in the present life, and also those in the future will not be different. 
If one has a house one is bound to worry about it again and again. If one has 
duties concerning one's daily work one is bound to worry again and again. Since 
we have a body we shall worry again and again about our health. We should 
ponder over the truth concerning the suffering in this life connected with the 
search for nutriment. We are actually searching food for dukkha. That is why we 
are continuously going around in the cycle, always travelling, time and again 
searching food for dukkha. 

Whenever we experience a pleasant object through the eyes we continue to 
search food for dukkha. We search as it were for dukkha in the cycle of birth and 
death. Whenever there is hearing and we are attached to sound we are already 
searching for dukkha. Attachment is the cause of dukkha in the cycle. We never 
stop searching for dukkha. Through the nose we smell fragrant odours, the scent 
of flowers, of perfums, and then we keep on searching for dukkha all around, 
everywhere. We search for dukkha when we taste flavour through the tongue, or 
when we experience tangible object through the bodysense. When we think of 
different subjects don't we search for dukkha ? We are searching for dukkha 
everywhere from morning until night. If we don't realize this we cannot be freed 
from the cycle of birth and death. 

Before defilements can be eradicated, before detachment, alobha, can arise and 
become powerful, so that selfishness can be given up, we should know the 
characteristic of the cause of dukkha, the food for dukkha. This is lobha, 
attachment, which searches all around. Lobha is the cause of dukkha whereas 

----------------------- Page 119-----------------------

                                          119 

alobha, detachment, is the cause of happiness. When one has less attachment to 
the objects which appear through the six doors is there not less searching for 
dukkha? The next life will be again like this life and the cycle will be very long if 
paññådoes not know the characteristics of realities as they are. Paññå should be 
developed to the degree that it realizes the four noble Truths and enlightenment 
is attained. 

In the next life there will be happiness and sorrow, and this depends on kamma. 
If one has right understanding about kamma and one has determination for 
kusala one will not be negligent.” 

These were Khun Sujin's words. 

The sutta on the two old bråhmins is followed by another sutta which is partly 
similar. The Buddha said to the two old bråhmins that the world is all ablaze 
with old age, sickness and death. We then read that he spoke the following 
verse: 

When a house is burning, goods removed therefrom, 

 Not which are burned, will be of use to him 

who removes them. So the world is burned 

By old age and death. Then save yourself by giving. 

What is given is well saved. 

The self-restraint of body, speech and mind 

In this life practised, meritorious deeds, 

These make for happiness when one has died. 

Through the development of right understanding of nåma and rúpa we shall see 
the danger of akusala and the benefit of kusala. We shall come to see the 
disadvantages of being born again and again. At this moment we do not see that 
life is dukkha. We are searching for dukkha so long as we are attached to nåma 

----------------------- Page 120-----------------------

                                                 120 

and rúpa. We can develop more understanding of the dukkha in our life by 
studying what the scriptures and the commentaries state about this subject. 
Although our understanding of dukkha is only theoretical it is beneficial to study 
the different aspects of dukkha. The study of the Dhamma in detail is a condition 
for the growth of paññå. Through the development of satipaììhåna there can 
gradually be direct understanding of the truth. 

The commentary to the "Book of Analysis" (Vibhaòga), the "Dispeller of 

                                                                                                  16 
Delusion", “Sammohavinodaní”, elaborates on the different aspects of dukkha   . 
We read in the section on the "Classification of the Truths" (Ch IV, 
Saccavibhaòga) about the many kinds of dukkha. We read about dukkha, 
suffering (93): 

Herein, bodily and mental painful feeling are called "suffering as suffering" 
(dukkha-dukkha, intrinsic suffering), because of their individual essence, 
because of their name and because of painfulness. Bodily and mental pleasant 
feeling are called "suffering in change" (vipariùåma-dukkha) because of being 
the cause of the arising of pain through their change. Indifferent feeling and the 
remaining formations of the three planes are called "suffering in formations" 
(saòkhåra-dukkha) because of their being oppressed by rise and fall... 

Saòkhåra dhammas, conditioned dhammas, which arise and fall away cannot be 
a refuge, thus they are dukkha. 

Under the section about birth we read that birth is dukkha. The commentary 
explains that birth is suffering since it is the basis for the arising of suffering. 
Birth is the foundation of many kinds of dukkha when it occurs in the unhappy 
planes, and it also is the foundation of dukkha in happy planes. In the human 
plane there is suffering rooted in the descent into the womb. The commentary 
describes the suffering of the unborn being because of heat of the mother's body, 
because of cold when his mother drinks cold water, because of all the pains 
when his mother gives birth. In the course of an existence there is pain in one 
who kills himself, who practises self-torture, who through anger does not eat or 

16 
  See also Visuddhimagga XVI, 32-61. 

----------------------- Page 121-----------------------

                                         121 

who hangs himself, or who undergoes suffering through the violence of others. 

Old age is dukkha. The commentary explains that it is called suffering as being 
the basis for both bodily and mental suffering. We read: 

...For the person of one who is aged is weak like an aged cart. Great suffering 
arises in one struggling to stand or to walk or to sit; grief arises in one when his 
wife and children are not as considerate as before. Thus it should be understood 
as suffering through being the basis for these two kinds of suffering. 
Furthermore: 

With leadenness in all one's limbs, 

With all one's faculties declining, 

With vanishing of youthfulness, 

With undermining of one's strength, 

With loss of memory and so on, 

With growing unattractiveness 

To one's own wife and family, 

And then with dotage coming on, 

The pain that mortals undergo, 

Alike of body and of mind- 

Since ageing causes all of this, 

Old age is thus called suffering. 

Death is dukkha. The dying moment is only one moment of citta which falls 
away and then there is another life, but one is no longer the same person. Death 
is called suffering because it is the basis for both mental and bodily suffering. 
There is bodily suffering before dying and also mental suffering. When one loses 
one's possessions one is unhappy, but at death one loses everything, one loses 
one's body, one loses one's life as this particular person. Death is the greatest 

----------------------- Page 122-----------------------

                                         122 

dukkha. We are attached to our possessions and we may be inclined to 
stinginess. If we remember that at death we have to leave everything behind it 
can be a condition to be less stingy. Stinginess can condition akusala kamma 
leading to an unhappy rebirth. "If we want to save things for ourselves we 
actually save them for Hell", Khun Sujin explained. The commentary states that 
those who, because of akusala kamma, are destined for an unhappy rebirth, have 
great fear and grief shortly before dying. At that moment the akusala kamma 
they committed or an image of Hell can appear to them.Thus we see that death 
is the basis for bodily and mental suffering. 

Sorrow (soka) is dukkha. Sorrow ruins, it rejects and destroys welfare, the 
commentary states. There are five kinds of ruins or losses: of relatives, of 
property, of health, of virtue, síla, and of right view. When one is affected by one 
of these losses and one is overwhelmed by it one has sorrow. These ruins are 
part of our daily life. One may lose relatives when robbers kill them, or one may 
lose them because of a war or because of disease. It is obvious that loss of 
relatives, of property and of health causes sorrow. As to loss of síla, this can 
cause one to worry about it and to suffer greatly. When there is loss of right 
view, one has wrong view, and this can condition many kinds of bad deeds 
which will bring unpleasant results. So long as one is attached to wrong view 
there is no way to become free from the cycle of birth and death. The 
commentary uses the words "inner sorrow" and "heart-burning". We read: "... for 
sorrow when it arises burns, consumes the mind like fire and makes one say: 'My 
mind is on fire. I cannot think of anything.' " Sorrow is compared to a dart which 
causes pain. It is the basis for both bodily and mental suffering. We read in the 
commentary that it has the characteristic of inner consuming, that its nature is to 
completely consume the mind and that its manifestation is continual sorrowing. 
We read the following verse: 

Sorrow like a (poisoned) arrow 

penetrates the heart of beings, 

And like a spear hot from the fire 

most grievously it keeps on burning. 

----------------------- Page 123-----------------------

                                         123 

And since it brings on many kinds 

of suffering such as disease, 

Old age and death, this too has thus 

acquired the name of suffering. 

In the "Gradual Sayings"(Book of the Twos, Ch I, no. 3, TapaníyåSutta) we read 
about the burning of remorse: 

Monks, there are these two things that sear (the conscience). What two? 

Herein, a certain one has done an immoral act of body, he has done immoral acts 
in speech and thought, has omitted moral acts in body, speech and thought. He 
is seared (with remorse) at the thought: I have done wrong in body, speech and 
thought. I have left undone the good deed in body, speech and thought. And he 
burns at the thought of it. These, monks, are the two things that sear (the 
conscience). 

The commentary to this sutta, the "Manorathapúraùí", illustrates how a bad 
conscience can cause great sorrow. We read that two brothers killed a cow and 
divided the flesh. However, the younger brother wanted to have more since he 
had many children. They had a fight and then the older brother killed the 
younger one. He realized that he had committed grave akusala kamma and kept 
on worrying about it. He could find no rest, no matter he was standing or sitting 
and he could no longer digest his food, so that he finally became only skin and 
bone. He was afterwards reborn in Hell as a result of his akusala kamma. 

Lamentation (parideva) is dukkha. It is the basis for both bodily and mental 
suffering. We read: 

Struck by sorrow's dart a man laments, 

Yet thus makes worse the pain born of dry throat 

----------------------- Page 124-----------------------

                                          124 

And lips and palate, and unbearable- 

So the Blessed One called lamentation pain. 

Pain is dukkha. Both bodily and mental pain are dukkha, because each of these is 
the basis for both bodily and mental suffering. When one is afflicted by bodily 
pain one also suffers mentally. When one is overwhelmed by grief one may bring 
bodily pain upon oneself by thumping one's breast or even by committing 
suicide. 

Woe (upåyåsa) is dukkha because it is also the basis for bodily and mental 
suffering. According to the commentary, it has the characteristic of frustration, 
its nature is moaning and it manifests itself as dejection. 

Furthermore, the commentary elaborates on the kinds of dukkha which are: 
association with the undesired, separation from the desired and not getting what 
one wishes. These are also the basis for both bodily and mental suffering. 

The five khandhas of clinging in short are dukkha. Thecommentary explains: 

In the description of the khandhas as objects of clinging, "in short" (sankhittena) 
is said with reference to the manner of teaching. For suffering cannot be 
summed up in short as so many hundred kinds of suffering, or so many thousand 
kinds of suffering, or so many hundred thousand kinds of suffering; but it can by 
the manner of teaching. Therefore he spoke thus, summing up the teaching in 
short in this way: "There is no other suffering at all, but in short the five 
khandhas as objects of clinging are suffering." 

According to the commentary the different kinds of suffering are generated in 
the five khandhas as grass is on the ground or fruits and flowers are on trees. 
Dukkha is inherent in the five khandhas of clinging. 

The fact that, in short, the five khandhas of clinging are dukkha reminds us of 
the ultimate truth. There is no being in the ultimate sense, there are only the five 
khandhas, nåma and rúpa. They arise and then fall away immediately and thus 

----------------------- Page 125-----------------------

                                         125 

they are unsatisfactory, one cannot take one's refuge in them. We may say that 
there is nothing desirable in life, that life is dukkha, but have we realized the 
truth of dukkha? Right understanding of the reality appearing at this moment 
should be developed, because this is the only way to know the truth about nåma 
and rúpa. 

Through the development of satipaììhåna there will be more understanding of 
cause and result in our life, of kamma and vipåka, and more understanding of 
our defilements which are conditioned by our accumulations. When there is 
more understanding there will be less dukkha. We usually react with akusala 
citta when we experience pleasant and unpleasant objects. We are disturbed by 
the eight "worldly conditions" of gain and loss, praise and blame, honour and 
dishonour, bodily well-being and misery. It is kamma which is the cause of our 
birth and which produces the sense organs through which we experience 
pleasant and unpleasant objects. Seeing, hearing and the other sense-impressions 
are results of kamma. If it were not forkamma there could not be seeing, hearing 
or the experience of tangible object at this moment. We cannot see the deeds 
committed in the past which produce results now but we should remember that 
we are heirs to kamma. We have theoretical understanding of kamma and vipåka 
but we do not apply this knowledge in our life. We keep on clinging to the "self" 
and we wonder why this or that unpleasant experience had to happen to "me". 
We usually forget that whatever happens has to happen because of conditions. 
When we suffer a loss there are sorrow, lamentation and woe, we complain and 
weare sorry for ourselves. When such moments arise there can be mindfulness of 
them so that we learn that they are only conditioned realities. When paññå has 
developed to the degree that the first stage of insight can arise nåma is known as 
nåma and rúpa as rúpa, their different characteristics are clearly distinguished. 
This stage can only be reached when understanding has been developed of all 
kinds of nåma and rúpa which appear through the six doors. When a stage of 
insight arises there is no self, no world, there are only nåma and rúpa which are 
conditioned. With each stage of insight there is also a growth of understanding 
of the "ownership of kamma", of kamma and result (kammassakata ñåùa). The 
development of satipaììhåna is the only way to be able to apply in daily life one's 
knowledge of kamma and result. Instead of reacting to the worldly conditions 
with akusala citta there will be more conditions to react wisely. Eventually there 

----------------------- Page 126-----------------------

                                              126 

can be more patience and equanimity towards the adversities of life. 

********** 

----------------------- Page 127-----------------------

                                             127 

Letter about Vipassanå 11 

We read in the “Kindred Sayings” (I, Sagåthå-vagga, Ch I, The Devas, 3, The 
Sword Suttas, § 1, By impending Sword) that a deva said to the Buddha: 

As one downsmitten by impending sword, 

As one whose hair and turban are aflame, 

So let the bhikkhu, mindful and alert, 

Go forth, all worldly passions left behind. 

The Exalted One said: 

As one downsmitten by impending sword, 

As one whose hair and turban are aflame, 

So let the bhikkhu, mindful and alert, 

Go forth, leaving personality-belief behind. 

Just as the person who has been struck by a sword or whose hair and turban are 
aflame will not be neglectful but apply energy to remedy his dangerous situation, 
evenso should the bhikkhu not be neglectful, but mindful and alert. The Buddha 
repeated what the deva said, but he changed one line, and this change is very 
meaningful. The deva spoke about subduing the sense pleasures, but so long as 
they have not been eradicated, will one be bound by clinging to them. They 
cannot be eradicated when there is still the wrong view of self. We read in the 
commentary to this sutta, the “Såratthappakåsiní”, that the Buddha, in view of 
this, wanted to change the deva’s verse, using the same similes but applying 
them to the magga-citta of the sotåpanna (the streamwinner, who attains the 
first stage of enlightenment), which citta eradicates personality-belief, sakkåya 
diììhi. 

----------------------- Page 128-----------------------

                                          128 

We may easily overlook the subtle point of this sutta. We understand in theory 
that first of all wrong view has to be eradicated before finally, at the third stage 
of enlightenment, the stage of the anågåmí (non-returner), clinging to sense 
pleasures can be eradicated. Even though we know this, we are still inclined to 
worry about our attachment to sense pleasures instead of knowing its 
characteristic when it appears. This is the only way to finally be able to eradicate 
it. “Should we hate our akusala? It is just a reality, it arises”, Khun Sujin 
reminded Sarah and Jonothan while they were in Bangkok. They recorded their 
conversations with Khun Sujin and I shall give an account of the contents of 
these tapes. 

Khun Sujin explained that she does not think that she should get rid of all 
defilements now. She remarked: 

“I do not think, ‘defilements are so ugly’, they are just realities. There should be 
understanding of them. People want to get rid of all defilements but they do not 
have any understanding of them. Why should our first objective not be right 
understanding? I do not understand why people are so much irritated by their 
defilements. One is drawn to the idea of self all the time, while one thinks about 
it whether one has less defilements or more. There is no understanding but 
merely thinking of kusala and akusala as ‘ours’. So long as there is ignorance 
there must be different degrees of akusala. We should just develop 
understanding of whatever reality appears. At the moment of developing 
understanding one is not carried away by thoughts about the amount of one’s 
defilements, wondering about it how many defilements one has or whether they 
are decreasing. Just be aware instantly!” 

We may not notice that we think of kusala and akusala as “ours”, but the idea is 
there, deep in our mind. Khun Sujin’s reminders can help us to consider more 
thoroughly what motivates our actions, speech and thoughts. Is it not mostly 
clinging to ourselves? Sarah remarked that when she reflects on lobha she has 
dosa and that this “spoils the fun”. Khun Sujin answered: 

----------------------- Page 129-----------------------

                                         129 

“That is only reflection, not the understanding of the characteristic which is not 
self. Who could change the characteristic of attachment. Understanding should 
be developed in a natural way. This is a relief. Even if lobha arises again, we 
should realize it as only a reality. You can understand the characteristic of lobha 
we talk about a great deal. It’s nature is non-self. This way of developing 
understanding is the most effective way. Then there is no attachment or aversion 
towards the object which appears. You should not stop pleasure, it is not ‘you’.” 

The object which appears is the object of which understanding should be 
developed. When understanding is being developed there is no attachment nor 
dislike of the object; no attachment when the object is kusala, no dislike when 
the object is akusala. We do not have to feel guilty when we enjoy ourselves, the 
enjoyment is only a reality. When we think of our defilements it is actually 
thinking of ourselves in a particular way all the time. Did we notice how busy we 
are with “ourselves”? 

We develop understanding and at times there is some awareness, but when we 
have problems in our daily life we become frustrated and we find it difficult to 
be aware of realities. Khun Sujin said: 

“When there is no awareness there has not been enough listening and not 
enough intellectual understanding of the objects of insight. One may think that it 
is enough to know that there are nåma and rúpa, but their characteristics have to 
be realized. Knowing the details of realities can help one to see their nature of 
anattå. This is very important for the growth of paññå. One has to become ‘a 
person who has listened a lot’, in Påli: bahussutta, in order to attain 
enlightenment.” 

Sarah asked Khun Sujin questions about the object of right understanding and 
about details one has to know. I shall quote from their conversation occurring 
during a traffic jam in Bangkok which lasted for hours: 

----------------------- Page 130-----------------------

                                                      130 

Khun Sujin: “One has to know the details of each of the six doorways, of the way 
realities are conditioned, of realities as dhåtus, elements, of the åyatanas, bases 

                     17 
or sense-fields   . The Buddha taught for fortyfive years about nåma and rúpa. 
Såriputta understood as soon as he heard the word ‘dhamma’, he understood 
realities as nåma and rúpa. For us it is different, we have to listen again and 
again and to consider what nåma is and what rúpa is. Seeing right now is an 
experience, it is just a reality. One has to consider and listen and discuss a great 
deal about these subjects.” 

Sarah: “We have considered seeing and discussed about the details of realities a 
great deal, I wonder how much more we should hear about it.” 

Khun Sujin: “Until awareness is aware with understanding right now. That is 
why the Buddha taught for fortyfive years about nåma and rúpa. The 
Abhidhamma is the essence of his teachings. He taught about paramattha 
dhammas so that one can see the difference between paramattha dhammas and 
concepts. He taught the conditions for realities. Knowing which cetasikas 
accompany citta helps one to see the nature of anattå. It is amazing that there 
are so many conditions needed for one moment of experiencing visible object, 
and then that moment is gone completely. It is all very intricate, not everyone 
can understand this instantly.” 

Sarah: “It never is enough, one can always know the object more precisely and in 
a more detailed way.” 

Khun Sujin: “Otherwise we underestimate the Buddha’s wisdom, we may think 
that he used just common, ordinary words. He taught us, so that by listening and 

                                                                                             18 
considering more and more we could one day become a sotåpanna   . By 
gradually developing understanding we can acquire full understanding of 
realities which appear. Right understanding of visible object and seeing is the 
only way to eradicate the latent tendencies of ‘I see’, and ‘me’, which are there all 
the time. Whenever there is feeling, it is ‘me’ again. The Buddha taught about 

                    19 
five khandhas   , he taught in many different ways in order to help people to 

17 
  The five senses and the mind, the five sense objects and mental objects have been classified as åyatanas. 

18 
  There are four stages of enlightenment: the stage of the sotåpanna (streamwinner), the sakadågåmí (once- 
returner), the anågåmí (non-returner) and the arahat, the perfected one. At each stage defilements are 
progressively eradicated until they are all eradicated at the attainment of arahatship. 

19 
  Conditioned realities are classified as five khandhas or aggregates: the khandha of rúpa, physical phenomena, 

----------------------- Page 131-----------------------

                                              131 

consider more, to understand more, so that, when there is awareness, right 
understanding can gradually develop.“ 

Sarah: “When there is no awareness we become impatient. Why is there not 
more awareness?” 

Khun Sujin: ”There are not enough påramís (perfections) accumulated.” 

Sarah: ”Which påramís?” 

Khun Sujin: “All påramís are needed. We should not be careless about them and 
we should not neglect any one of them. Paññå is needed above all, the other 
nine påramís are the “attendants” of paññå. Without paññå the other påramís 
cannot develop.” 

We read in the commentary to the “Cariyåpiìaka”, the “Paramatthadípaní”, that 
the aspiration (to become a Buddha) and also great compassion and skilful 
means are conditions for the påramís. We read: 

“Therein, skilful means is the wisdom which transforms dåna (and the other nine 
virtues) into requisites for enlightenment.” 

At the moment there is right understanding of realities there is no clinging to 
“my kusala”. However, we usually cling, we want to be “the good person”. We 
find that it feels better to have kusala citta, and then there is clinging again. 
When we observe the five precepts or eight precepts, there is likely to be 
clinging, do we want to be better than others who do not observe precepts? 
When we think of the development of mettå, we may be wondering how much 
mettå we have already, we may try to “measure” it. Then we are again thinking 
of “my kusala”, instead of developing mettå. We should not underestimate the 
accumulation of defilements. We do not notice the lobha that clings to “self”, 
that wants the “self” to be good. Khun Sujin remarked that when there is no 
understanding there is lobha. 

of vedanå, feeling, of saññå, perception or memory, of saùkhåra, mental factors or cetasikas, except feeling and 

perception, and viññåùa, consciousness. 

----------------------- Page 132-----------------------

                                           132 

When we try to have mettå instead of anger, is there clinging to “self”? Jonothan 
said that when he is about to lose his temper he tries to be patient. It is 
unpleasant for the people around oneself if one gives in to anger. We may see 
that anger is useless and then sati can arise which prevents the arising of anger. 
There is no “self“ who tries, but sati which performs its function. This is one level 
of sati but it is not sati of satipaììhåna accompanying paññå which sees realities 
as nåma and rúpa, not self. When there is wrong view of self who tries to stop 
anger it does not work. Khun Sujin remarked: 

“One should not cling to the idea of ‘I have lots of anger, I try not to have it.’ 
Then there is only thinking with the idea of self all the time. I don’t mind what 
level of akusala will arise, even if it is strong anger. It arises and then it is gone, 
it cannot stay. What about the present moment? I always encourage people to 
have right understanding instead of trying to control with the idea of self. If that 
is the case they will never reach the level of understanding realities, not even 
understanding based on reflection about nåma and rúpa. There can be 
awareness of anger you have talked about a great deal. When it arises and 
performs its function it is there for you to see its characteristic as ‘just a reality’, 
instead of thinking about it.” 

Sarah was wondering whether it would not be useful sometimes to set rules for 
one’s behaviour. She was wondering how one can correct unwholesome speech. 

Khun Sujin reminded her that whatever one is doing or not doing, it is not self. 
Don’t we forget that all the time? We know that we have not eradicated the 
clinging to the idea of “self”, but we do not realize how deeply rooted wrong 
view is. Khun Sujin said: 

“Even when one wants to set rules there is no self, it is only thinking. The only 
way to get rid of the self is to understand all situations. One should not set any 
rules, there should only be development of understanding of realities. 
Unwholesome speech can be corrected by paññå which sees its danger and that 
is one level of sati. Another level is sati of satipaììhåna. The most precious 

----------------------- Page 133-----------------------

                                         133 

moment is the moment of being aware. If one forces oneself, sets rules or clings 
to a certain practice it does not help one to understand this moment, one’s 
thinking, seeing or hearing.” 

Instead of being aware of this moment we are carried away by our thinking of 
stories about other people or events which took place. We think of other people’s 
lobha, dosa and moha and this conditions aversion. We cannot change someone 
else because each moment is conditioned. Instead of thinking of other people’s 
faults, we should ask ourselves: what about our own citta which thinks? We may 
be troubled by thinking about a bad experience in the past but then we need 
right understanding to start anew. “Forget yesterday”, Khun Sujin said. 
“Satipaììhåna saves one from akusala moments”, she remarked. If there can be 
awareness of our own akusala which arises, the object is a paramattha dhamma, 
and there is no involvement in concepts. We have heard this before, but we have 
to hear it again and again before it sinks in. Our goal is the understanding of the 
reality appearing at this moment. We do not go any further than this moment. If 
we think of problems or situations there is no understanding of the reality 
appearing at this moment, Khun Sujin said. 

Through right understanding of nåma and rúpa we shall be more convinced of 
the truth of kamma and vipåka. This moment of seeing or hearing is result of 
kamma, a deed done in the past. We cannot know which kamma of the past 
produces result at a particular moment, but it is helpful to know that a pleasant 
or unpleasant result is conditioned by a deed we performed. Nobody can prevent 
the result from taking place. We cannot blame other people. When we, for 
example, are disturbed by the noise of a radio or the noise made by the 
neighbours’ children, we can remember that hearing is vipåka and that thinking 
with aversion is akusala citta which arises at another moment. Then the object of 
citta is the present reality and we are not carried away by thinking of concepts. 
When confidence in the truth of kamma and vipåka arises there will be less fear 
and worry. If we cannot sleep we may worry about it, but we should know that 
this is conditioned. When we are fast asleep, without dreaming, there are 
bhavanga-cittas (life-continuum) which do not experience the objects impinging 
on the senses and the mind-door, and these cittas are results of kamma. Khun 

----------------------- Page 134-----------------------

                                         134 

Sujin said to Sarah and Jonothan: 

“When you understand dhamma as dhamma, you see that everything occurs 
because of conditions. We fall asleep and get up again, because of conditions. 
When there are problems, it is because of conditions. There are just different 
realities, and even though realities appear, ignorance cannot understand them. 
We take realities for ‘something’ all the time. But awareness can ‘flash in’ any 
time, because of conditions, and that is the right awareness.” 

Khun Sujin said that one actually lives alone and that it is most helpful to realize 
this. We have heard this before, but it becomes more meaningful when there is 
more understanding of the difference between the moment the object of citta is a 
paramattha dhamma and the moment we are thinking of a concept of a person 
or a thing. If we are disturbed by other people it seems that there are people, but 
what is the reality? Only a citta which thinks. When we are back to the present 
reality, the paramattha dhamma, we know that we are living alone, and such a 
moment is beneficial. There are only nåma and rúpa, no people. When we are 
thinking, we live in our own world of thinking. No matter in the past, in this life 
or the next life, one always lives alone. 

During the discussions Khun Sujin stressed that we should see dhamma as 
dhamma. We may say that everything is dhamma, just a reality, but right 
understanding has to grow through awareness of realities, so that they can be 
seen as just dhammas, no person or thing, no self. We have to hear this again 
and again, but Såriputta, when he heard a few sentences about realities, 
understood immediately and realized dhamma as dhamma. He had accumulated 
paññå for aeons. We read in the “Vinaya” (Book of the Discipline, Part 4, 
Mahåvagga I, 23, 3-5) that Såriputta asked Assaji what the doctrine was the 
Buddha had taught him. Assaji answered that he was not long gone forth and 
could therefore not teach dhamma in full, but only briefly. Såriputta asked him 
to explain the meaning of it, saying that he did not need a great elaboration. We 
read: 

----------------------- Page 135-----------------------

                                          135 

Then the venerable Assaji uttered this terse expression of dhamma to the 
wanderer Såriputta: 

“Those dhammas which proceed from a cause (hetu), of these the Truthfinder 
has told the cause. 

And that which is their stopping (nirodho)- the great recluse has such a 
doctrine.” 

When the wanderer Såriputta had heard this terse expression of dhamma, there 
arose dhamma-vision, dustless, stainless, that “Whatever is of the nature to 
uprise all that is of the nature to stop.” He said: “If this is indeed dhamma, you 
have penetrated as far as the sorrowless path, unseen, neglected for many 
myriads of aeons.” 

Såriputta understood directly the four noble Truths: dukkha, the cause of 
dukkha, its ceasing and the way leading to its ceasing. We have intellectual 
understanding of the four noble Truths, but they can be directly realized without 
having to think about them. We cannot imagine how this is possible so long as 
paññå has not been developed to that degree. Seeing now arises because of 
conditions, it is part of the cycle of birth and death. Seeing has to fall away, thus 
it is dukkha. Såriputta immediately understood that right understanding of the 
reality arising at the present moment leads to the elimination of ignorance and 
craving which are the conditions for being in the cycle of birth and death, the 
conditions for seeing, hearing and the other realities which arise. He understood 
the reality of the present moment as dhamma, arising because of conditions. He 
penetrated its characteristic of anattå. 

For us it is difficult to see dhamma as dhamma because ignorance covers up the 
truth. We read in the commentary to the “Book of Analysis” (the “Vibhaòga”, the 
second book of the Abhidhamma), in the “Dispeller of Delusion” 
(Sammohavinodaní, I, Ch VI, Classification of the Structure of Conditions, 140) 
about ignorance which is opposed to understanding. We read: 

That is to say, knowledge is understanding. It makes known and plain the four 

----------------------- Page 136-----------------------

                                           136 

Truths with each meaning and each cause. But this ignorance when it arises does 
not allow that (understanding) to make that (dhamma) known and plain; thus, 
because of its opposition to knowledge, it is unknowing. Also seeing is 
understanding. It sees quality. But ignorance when it arises does not allow it to 
see, thus it is unseeing.... 

We then read that whenever ignorance arises it does not allow understanding to 
penetrate, to grasp and to rightly consider the truth. Thus, each time it arises it 
blocks and hinders the operation of understanding. This text reminds us of the 
activity of ignorance which is unnoticed, because when there is ignorance we do 
not know that there is ignorance. It is very treacherous. 

We need to develop understanding of paramattha dhammas life after life, in 
order to see dhamma as dhamma, to see it as anattå. We cling to the idea of “our 
whole body”, but when there is touching, hardness is the dhamma which 
appears. The idea of the whole body is only in one’s memory. Khun Sujin said: 

“When there is touching, where is your head, where are your legs? Only in your 
memory. When there is touching you may not realize it as merely a moment of 
experiencing an object. Deep in your mind there is still the idea of ‘something’. 
For instance, when you touch something in the dark you like to know what it is, 
thus there is still ‘something’. There are only six doors, and one object is 
appearing at a time. It does not stay, waiting for you to touch it.” 

Several conditioning factors are needed for the experience of hardness, such as 
the rúpa which is hardness and the rúpa which is bodysense. Also these 
conditioning factors are themselves conditioned. Hardness and softness are 
characteristics of the Element of solidity, one of the four Great Elements and this 
is conditioned by the other three Elements of cohesion, heat and motion arising 
together with it. The rúpa which is bodysense is produced by kamma. The 
experience of tangible object through the bodysense is vipåka, the result of 
kamma. We see how intricate the combination of different conditioning factors 
are; they are just there for a moment of experiencing hardness. We cannot direct 

----------------------- Page 137-----------------------

                                          137 

the coming together of these factors and none of them can last. They are only 
present for an extremely short while, they are insignificant dhammas. 

Some people want to concentrate on rúpas of the body. By focussing on one 
point of the body they believe that they can notice the rúpa which is bodysense. 
The bodysense is all over the body but when tangible object impinges on the 
rúpa which is bodysense, it does so only on one point. That extremely small 
particle is then the rúpa which is the physical base for body-consciousness, and it 
is also the doorway through which tangible object is experienced. When a rúpa 
like heat or hardness is impinging on the bodysense it can hurt and painful 
feeling arises. But can we directly experience the rúpa which is the bodydoor, 
arising and falling away where there is impingement at that moment? It falls 
away immediately. It is useless to try to find out where the impingement was. 
Then we continue to think of realities and there is no awareness of other realities 
which present themselves, such as seeing or visible object. We cannot help it that 
we think of the part of the body which hurts, but we should know that this is 
only thinking, a conditioned reality. If one tries to focus on one part of the body, 
one should ask oneself, what about this moment? If we are aware of what 
appears at this moment there is only that dhamma, and there is no need to find 
out where there is impingement on the bodysense. Khun Sujin explained that 
one does not own anything: 

“One thinks of one’s whole body and of one’s possessions as belonging to oneself, 
but there isn’t anything one owns, not even visible object in this room. It arises, 
appears and falls away. The succession of different rúpas which are visible object 
conditions the concept of ‘something’. We can see how fast citta arises and falls 
away, it can lure us like a magician. If we do not know this there is ‘I’ and ‘mine’ 
all the time. Does sound belong to anyone? If it is your voice, does it belong to 
you? 

Visible object is just a rúpa out of twentyeight rúpas. It is the only reality that 
can be seen. We find our thoughts about visible object so important, but visible 
object is only a kind of rúpa. When one has understanding of visible object and 
of thinking, one sees the difference between the absolute truth and the 
conventional truth. One knows how and when conventional truth begins.“ 

----------------------- Page 138-----------------------

                                          138 

When we have more understanding of the difference between seeing and paying 
attention to shape and form, it will be clearer when the object of citta is just one 
reality, appearing through one of the six doors, and when the object is a concept. 
In the absolute sense there is no owner of anything, but does it then make sense 
to try to acquire possessions? There was a discussion about this topic in the 
house of our friends Ivan and Ell. Ivan used to think that when one contemplates 
Dhamma one should have fewness of wishes. Then there is no need to expand 
one’s business in order to make more money. Now he understands that 
satipaììhåna should be developed in a natural way, that one should not try to 
change one’s life style. If one is a layman one should not try to live the monk’s 
life, a life of contentment with little. Khun Sujin said: 

“We have lobha, no matter whether we work or do not work. We work because 
we were born. Working is only seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching and 
thinking. You don’t have to change yourself or prepare yourself for Dhamma, you 
don’t have to devote all your time to it, but develop understanding of this very 
moment, in order to see it as just dhamma. Seeing and visible object are just 
dhammas, everything in one’s life is dhamma. But one does not see dhamma, 
one does not understand dhamma as it is. One tries to spend time on dhamma, 
to change one’s life, but just now there is dhamma. If we talk more about 
realities or dhammas and we begin to understand dhamma as it is, then, at 
times, awareness can arise for a very short moment. That is the true awareness. 
If you try to devote your time to dhamma, and you sit, trying to watch realities, 
true dhamma does not appear. It is awareness which can be aware if there is 
enough understanding of realities. We should not force ourselves to have 
awareness, then there is lobha again. Dhamma is very natural, no need to 
reserve time for it or prepare oneself for it. One needs more understanding as 
condition for awareness to arise any time by itself. Then it is the right sati, the 
sammå-sati.” 

We may wonder whether watching T.V. would hinder the arising of sati. While 

----------------------- Page 139-----------------------

                                         139 

we watch there are many conditions for attachment, or, when the movie is 
frightening we have fear. Khun Sujin said about this: “Each move is conditioned, 
that is the meaning of anattå.” In other words, if we want to watch T.V. this wish 
is conditioned already. Also while we watch there is seeing, hearing or thinking, 
one reality at a time. Realities appear, no matter whether we watch or do not 
watch T.V. There is one world at a time appearing through one of the six 
doorways. These six worlds should be separated until there is no self. Realities 
appear because of their own conditions, not because of our wish. Khun Sujin 
said: 

“ Hardness is already there as object of which right understanding can be 
developed. Visible object appears. There is no need to do anything.” 

When Sarah asked why we always have so much lobha, Khun Sujin answered: 

“It is the function of lobha to cling, that is why there is clinging. We cannot 
change its characteristic or function. This reminds us that lobha is dhamma, it 
arises because of its own conditions, it is there as object of which right 
understanding can be developed.“ 

The Buddha taught the monks, the nuns and the layfollowers, men and women, 
to develop satipaììhåna, each in their own situation and each following their 
own life style, so that they would see dhamma as dhamma. We read in the 
“Gradual Sayings” (Book of the Eights,Ch VII, § 10, Earthquakes) that the 
Buddha, while he was at Cåpåla Shrine, gave Ånanda three times the 
opportunity to ask him to live on for his full life-span. Ånanda did not ask him to 
do so, since his heart was possessed by Måra. After Ånanda had left, Måra came 
and said to the Buddha that he should now pass away. After his enlightenment 
the Buddha had said to Måra that he would not pass away until his disciples 
were able to practise the Dhamma and to proclaim it. Since this was now the 
case Måra asked him to pass away. The Buddha answered that he would pass 

----------------------- Page 140-----------------------

                                          140 

away after three months. We read that he “cast away the sum of life” and that 
there was a great earthquake. In this sutta we are reminded of what is to be 
expected of the Buddha’s followers. The Buddha had, after his enlightenment, 
said to Måra: 

I shall not pass away, O Evil One, until my monks shall be disciples, learned, 
trained and courageous, who have attained peace from bondage, who are 
erudite, Dhamma-bearers, perfect in righteousness of Dhamma, perfect in the 
right practice, who live in accordance with Dhamma- till they have taken 
Dhamma as their teacher and can proclaim it, teach it and make it known, can 
establish it, open it, analyze it and make it plain to others- till they can confute 
any counter-teaching which has arisen, and which may well be confuted by 
Dhamma, and can set forth sublime Dhamma. 

We read that the Buddha had said exactly the same about the nuns and the 
layfollowers, men and women. The commentary to this sutta, the 
“Manorathapúraùí, explains “erudite”, in Påli: bahussutta, as having listened to 
the three Piìakas (Parts of the teachings). The commentary then adds that one is 
bahussutta as to “pariyatti”, the theory, and as to “pativedha”, the realisation of 
the truth. One should be “Dhamma-bearer” in both ways. This reminds us that it 
is not enough to only listen and read. There should also be the application of 
what one has heard so that the truth can be directly experienced. The disciples 
should be perfect in righteousness of Dhamma. We read that the commentary 
states:”They practise the Way of vipassanå which is the Dhamma fitting to be 
ariyan Dhamma.” 

The Buddha’s followers should take Dhamma as their teacher. Khun Sujin 
reminded Sarah and Jonothan again that we should not be dependant on 
someone else. She said: 

“Take Dhamma as your teacher, do not depend too much on others. The 
understanding of realities depends on your own consideration. I do not like to 
depend on others. It has to be my own struggle to understand the teachings. You 

----------------------- Page 141-----------------------

                                           141 

do not need someone else to tell you how much understanding you have. This 
present object will tell you.” 

There is visible object now. We can check whether it is understood as just 
dhamma or whether there is still “something” in it. Nobody else has to tell us. 
Dhamma is our teacher. 

******* 
