----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

Alone with Dhamma 

                                          Pilgrimage in India, October 2005 

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------


----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

                                                                                          ● 1 

 Chapter 1 

Alone with Dhamma 

“We live alone in the world”, this was one of the striking points Acharn Sujin  
explained   to   us  during   our   pilgrimage   in   India   with   hundred   and   twenty  
Dhamma-friends from Thailand and elsewhere. 

   We read in the Kindred  Sayings  (IV,  144, Kindred  Sayings on  Sense,  §165,  
Abandoning Wrong View, translated by Ven. Bodhi) that the Buddha said: 

      “Bhikkhu, when one knows and sees the eye as impermanent, wrong view is  
      abandoned. When one knows and sees forms as impermanent... eye- 
      consciousness as impermanent... eye-contact as impermanent... whatever  
      feeling arises with mind-contact as condition... as impermanent, wrong view is  
      abandoned. It is when one knows and sees thus that wrong view is abandoned.” 

The Buddha spoke thus with regard to all dhammas appearing through the six  
doorways. 
   When a person dies we may think about the impermanence of life, but this  
is not the realization of the truth of impermanence, the truth that each reality  
that   arises   because   of   its   appropriate   conditions   falls   away.   The   Buddha  
teaches   us  what   life  really  is:  it  is  one  moment  of  experiencing  an  object  
through  one  of the  six  doorways, the  doorways  of the  senses  and the  mind- 
door. Visible object, sound, these are dhammas appearing at this moment, but  
we are ignorant of the truth. 

Acharn  Sujin  said that we live  alone in the world, that we believe that there  
are many people around us, but that this is thinking. It is hard to accept this  
truth. Citta thinks of relatives and friends who exist. However, in the ultimate  
sense, a person is citta, cetasika and rúpa. Citta is consciousness, cetasikas are  
the  mental  factors  arising with  the  citta,  and  rúpa  are  physical  phenomena.  
Seeing  is  a  citta,  hearing  is  another  citta  and  thinking  again  another  citta.  
Citta  and  the  accompanying  cetasikas  arise  and  then  fall  away  immediately  
and also the rúpas of which the body consists arise and fall away. 
   Understanding that  in the ultimate  sense  a person  is  impermanent mental  
phenomena   and   bodily   phenomena   does   not   mean   that   there   cannot   be  
kindness and compassion for others. On the contrary, the Buddha exhorted us  

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

2 ● Alone with Dhamma 

to  develop  all kinds  of kusala  and  to  assist  our  fellowmen.  However,  at  the  
same time we can develop understanding of what life really is: the experience  
of one object through one of the six doors. When there is less clinging to ‘my  
personality’ we shall be more concerned for other people’s welfare. 
   Acharn Sujin explained that we are born alone: the rebirth-consciousness is  
a citta that arises and falls away and is succeeded by a following citta. There  
cannot be  more  than  one  citta  at  a  time. We  see  alone, we  think  alone, we  
sleep alone, we die alone. The citta that falls away never returns; after passing  
away from this plane there is no return of the same individual. 
   Whenever   citta   arises,   it   experiences   one   object   and   then   falls   away  
immediately.   When   visible   object   appears   we   take   it   immediately   as   this  
person   or  my  friend,  but   that   is  thinking  on  account  of  the   experience  of  
visible  object. The Buddha taught  about  all  dhammas  appearing through the  
six  doors,  and  during  our pilgrimage this was  a topic  of discussion time  and  
again.  

During our pilgrimage we visited the holy places where the Buddha was born,  
attained enlightenment, preached his first sermon, and passed finally away. It  
was  a long  and difficult journey,  but,  as  a monk in Kusinåra  said, it was our  
confidence in the Buddha’s teachings that brought us to these places with the  
purpose to pay respect to him. 
   When we were in Lumbini Acharn Sujin reminded us that the teachings are  
declining and will eventually disappear. Then nobody will know anymore the  
meaning of the holy places. Now we still have the opportunity to pay respect  
to the Buddha  at these places,  and  it  is  as  if we pay respect  at his feet. The  
Buddha fulfilled all the perfections and after dwelling in the Tusita Heaven he  
became  a  human being  and was born  in  Lumbini.  That was his  last  life.  In  
Bodhgaya   he   became   a   Sammåsambuddha   in   order   to   help   the   world   to  
become free from dukkha. 

Khun  Sujin helped us to have more understanding of the dhamma appearing  
at   the   present   moment,   because   without   such   understanding   we   only  
speculate  about  the  truth.  Her  energy  to  speak  extensively  on  the  Dhamma  
was   truly   amazing  and   it  showed  her   concern  for  us.   She  exhorted  us  to  
develop understanding, no matter whether the circumstances were disturbing,  
no matter whether we were sick or tired. She would repeatedly say: “develop  
understanding now.”  
   During  our journey   we  also  visited   different  Thai  monasteries  where   we  
offered robes  and other requisites. The Abbot of the Thai temple  in Nalanda  
expressed   his   appreciation   of   Acharn   Sujin’s   Dhamma   talks   to   which   he  
listened regularly. In the Thai temple of Kusinåra the Abbot gave Acharn Sujin  
a blessing and said that he had listened to her for forty years, since the time he  

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

                                                                   Alone with Dhamma ● 3 

was a monk in the temple of Mahå-dhåtu in Bangkok. During the rainy season  
he  listened for  one  and  a half hour  in the morning,  and  also  after the  rainy  
season he listened regularly. He said: “How could we understand the Dhamma  
without Acharn Sujin, where would we be without her.” 
   We   rejoiced   in   his   appreciation   of   Acharn   Sujin’s   efforts   to   explain   the  
Dhamma. This monastery also has a Dispensary where many people from the  
province are coming. It is supported by devoted volunteers. 
   While we were in  Sarnath, the place of the Buddha’s first sermon, we were  
given the opportunity to pay respect to the Buddha’s relics which are kept in a  
ten  meter  deep  cellar. A  monk  had  to  descend  into  it  to  fetch  them.  Since  
Lodewijk just  had his  eightieth birthday, Acharn  Sujin had  asked us to  carry  
the relics in turn towards the altar, and Lodewijk also carried them back to the  
shrine at the end of the ceremony. 
   Afterwards   we   offered   Sangha   Dåna   to   the   monks.   Lodewijk   spoke   the  
following words of thanksgiving to them : 

      Venerable Monks, 

      On behalf of this group of Thai and foreign pilgrims under the spiritual  
      leadership of Acharn Sujin Boriharnwanaket and the practical leadership of Mr.  
      Suwat Chansuvithiyanant, I wish to thank you for giving us this opportunity to  
      perform Sangha Dåna and to pay you our deep respect. Your community of  
      monks reminds us of the vital importance of the Sangha, the third of the Triple  
      Gem, now and in the future. 
         Last week, my wife Nina and I celebrated my eightieth birthday by paying  
      respect to the place Kuru in New Delhi, where the Lord Buddha preached the  
      Satipaììhåna Sutta. Nina recited the text to me and I was, again, struck by the  
      power of this Sutta and its significance for our daily life. 
         This morning, I received the most precious birthday present one can wish for:  
      the honour to carry the relics of the Lord Buddha. 
         The two most important and happiest events in my life were marrying Nina  
      and our encounter with Buddhism through the hands of Acharn Sujin who, ever  
      since, has guided us on the Path and who, during this tour, tirelessly explained  
      the Dhamma to us, wherever and whenever possible. 
         Looking back on my life, I feel distressed by the amount of accumulated  
      akusala committed in the past. 
         I feel distressed by dukkha, by the burden of the five Khandhas of grasping,  
      so well explained in the teachings: rúpa khandha, vedanå khandha (feeling),  
      saññå khandha (remembrance), saòkhåra khandha (mental formations) and  
      viññåùa khandha. 
         I feel distressed by the destructive power of the five hindrances, so forcefully  
      put forth in the teachings, which are: desire of sense pleasures, aversion,  

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

4 ● Alone with Dhamma 

      restlessness and worry, sloth and torpor and doubt. 
        And yet, I understand at least in theory, that regret of the past makes no  
      sense, that there is no self in the past, and that it is understanding of the  
      present moment that counts. 
        And, in fact, I have every reason to be grateful. 
         Every day, I am encouraged and inspired by Nina’s tireless efforts to  
      understand the Dhamma and to help others to understand it. 
         I was inspired by the courage of Nina’s father who recently passed away at  
      the age of hundred and four and who, despite his incapacities of body and  
      mind, never gave up and always looked towards the future. 
        And above all, who should be distressed when he hears the voice of the Lord  
      Buddha: “Abandon evil, O monks. One can abandon evil, O monks. If it were  
      impossible to abandon evil, I would not ask you to do so. But as it can be done,  
      therefore, I say: Abandon evil!”, and similarly on cultivating the good. 
         On our long j ourney towards wisdom, we need the support and the  
      inspiration of the Sangha and therefore, I urge you, venerable monks, to  
      persevere in your task of preserving and propagating the teachings. 
         We thank you for giving us this opportunity to perform Sangha Dåna and as  
      a token of our thanks, I wish to present to you, Venerable Head Monk, Acharn  
      Sujin’s book, “A Survey of Paramattha Dhammas”, translated from Thai by  
      Nina and recently published in Bangkok. It is a masterful, all encompassing  
      treatise on the Dhamma and I hope that it will be of use to your community. 

                                             ****** 

When   we   were   in   Lumbini,   the   Buddha’s   birth   place,   circumambulating  
Asoka’s pillar, I could not find Lodewijk. I was very sad because I thought that  
this would be the last occasion that we would circumambulate together in this  
place.  After   a  while   he  found  me  and  we   could  continue  together,  paying  
respect  to  the  Buddha.  I  remarked  to  him  that  the  dosa  that   arose  was   a  
perfect  subject  of  satipaììhåna.  We   never  know  what  will  happen  the  next  
moment   and   I   realized   that   the   greatest   respect   to   the   Buddha   is   being  
mindful  of the  dhamma that presents  itself  at the present  moment. We  may  
feel lonely, but in the ultimate sense we are alone with Dhamma, the teaching  
of the truth of life and death. 

We  notice  dosa  and  feel  unpleasant  feeling. We  believe  that we  experience  
dosa,  but   we   do  not  realize  it  as  a  dhamma,  arising  because   of  its  proper  
conditions. I realized that noticing dosa is only thinking about it, and at such a  
moment   there   is   still   an   idea   of   “my   dosa”.   Acharn   Sujin   said   that  
understanding based on listening leads to thinking in the right way  of nåma  
and rúpa; only if right understanding has become more firmly established, it  

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

                                                                   Alone with Dhamma ● 5 

can condition direct awareness of realities. If there are no conditions for it, it  
is impossible to be directly aware of dosa and realize it as a dhamma, non-self.  
   At   the  first  stage  of  insight,  the  difference  between  the   characteristic  of  
nåma  and  of  rúpa  is  clearly  realized,  not  before.  One  begins  to  understand  
nåma as nåma and rúpa as rúpa. This means, we begin to see the nåma that  
appears as a dhamma and the rúpa that appears as a dhamma. 
   Before this  stage of insight is reached, there  is  still  a notion of  “my dosa”,  
and  “my  lobha”,  even though we have  intellectual understanding  of the  fact  
that  they  are  cetasikas,  non-self. We have  not  really  penetrated the  truth  of  
anattå. 

The wrong view of self is eradicated by the sotåpanna. He still has lobha and  
dosa  but   he  does  not  take  them  for  “self”  and  this  makes  a  great  deal  of  
difference.   At   this   stage   paññå   can   see   defilements   as   dhammas,   arisen  
because of their own conditions. Attachment to sense objects and aversion are  
eradicated at the third stage of enlightenment, the stage of the non-returner.  
Paññå  has  to  be  developed  in  the  right  order,  the  right  order  in  stages  of  
insight, and stages of enlightenment. 
   We should begin to develop understanding of what appears now. When our  
eyes are open seeing appears. Seeing could not arise if there were no eyesense  
and visible   object  or  colour.  Seeing  is  a  dhamma  that  arises  because  of  its  
proper conditions. Realities appear one at a time through the six doors. When  
hardness  appears,  it  seems  that  it  was   there  already  for  some  time,  but  in  
reality it arises and then falls away. There is hardness again, but it cannot be  
the same. Each dhamma that arises and falls away never returns. So it is with  
lobha and dosa, they seem to last for a while, but they fall away immediately.  
However, we think of them for a long time. When we are thinking, there is no  
realization   of   their   characteristics.   We   think   of   what   is   past   instead   of  
attending to the characteristic appearing right now. 
   All that is experienced is dependent on citta that arises and then falls away  
immediately. Citta is the chief in knowing an object and it is accompanied by  
several  cetasikas  that  each  perform  their  own  function.  Citta  and  cetasikas  
experience  objects  through   the   five   sense-doors   and   the  mind-door.   Rúpa,  
physical   phenomena,  can  be   experienced  through   the   sense-doors   and   the  
mind-door  and  nåma,  mental  phenomena,  can be  experienced  only  through  
the mind-door. 
   The   rúpas   of   visible   object,   sound,   odour   and   flavour   are   experienced  
through  the  relevant  sense-doors  and  subsequently  through  the  mind-door.  
The   rúpas   that   are   tactile   object   are:   solidity   appearing   as   hardness   or  
softness,  temperature,  appearing  as  heat  or  cold,  and  motion,  appearing  as  
motion and pressure. These rúpas are experienced through the bodysense and  
subsequently through the mind-door. Thus, seven rúpas appear all the time in  

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

6 ● Alone with Dhamma 

daily life, and without citta and cetasikas they could not appear. 
   The  Buddha  taught  us  to  develop  understanding  of  ultimate  realities,  of  
rúpa and nåma which includes citta and cetasikas, mental factors arising with  
the   citta.   In   this   way   wrong   view   and   all   defilements   can   be   eradicated.  
Ultimate realities or paramattha dhammas are different from concepts such as  
persons,  things  or  events we  may think  of. Ultimate  realities  are the  objects  
right understanding should be developed of. 
   We may study citta, cetasika and rúpa, but we are still bound to take citta  
for “my experience” and rúpa for “my body” or “my possessions”. We need to  
listen again and again and consider what we heard so that understanding can  
gradually develop. 

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

                                                                                          ● 7 

Chapter 2 

Remembrance of the Dhamma 

When we were visiting the Thai Temple in Bodhgaya, two neatly dressed boys  
with neckties entered. Young as they were, they recited for us the beginning of  
the   Dhammasangaùi,   the   first   Book   of   the   Abhidhamma,   enumerating   all  
sobhana   cetasikas   that   accompany   kusala   citta.   They   recited   the   Påli   text  
without mistakes, helping each other. It was impressive to hear the Påli text so  
well recited. 
   When we asked them about the meaning of kusala cittas and akusala cittas  
in daily life they could not answer our questions. Their teacher explained that  
the application of the Dhamma was a subject dealt with in the higher grades,  
not in the beginning. This shows that reciting and learning the terms by heart  
is very  different  from  applying  them  in  daily  life.  The  understanding  of  the  
realities of daily life is the purpose of studying Abhidhamma. 

Acharn  Sujin  said  to  us:  “One  does  not  know  that  studying Abhidhamma  is  
right   now.   If   one   does   not   understand   this   moment,   one   does   not   study  
Abhidhamma.” 
   We asked many questions during our pilgrimage,  and Acharn  Sujin  always  
led us back to the dhamma appearing at the present moment. 
   Without  awareness  and  understanding  of what  appears  now we  shall  not  
know what citta, cetasika and rúpa are. One may wonder what the difference  
is between thinking of realities and direct awareness of them. 
   Sati  arises with  sobhana  (beautiful) citta. There is sati of the level of dåna  
which is non-forgetful of generosity. There is sati of the level of síla which is  
non-forgetful with regard to abstinence from akusala. There is sati of the level  
of   samatha   which   is   mindful   of  the   development   of   calm   with   a  suitable  
meditation subject. There is sati of the level of satipaììhåna which is mindful  
of one nåma or rúpa at a time in order to realize their true nature. 
   We  discussed  sati  of  the  level  of  satipaììhåna  time  and  again  since  it  is  
important to have right understanding  of what  sati  is  and what its  object  is.  
We   know   that  sati  is  a  sobhana  cetasika  and  not  self,  but  have   we   really  
understood  this?  We  learnt  that  sati  is  aware  of  one  object  at  a  time  as  it  
appears through one doorway at a time, but can we apply this knowledge? 
   We  have   to  listen  again  and  again  and  consider  in  order  to   have  more  
understanding. Acharn Sujin repeated three times: have more understanding. 

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

8 ● Alone with Dhamma 

The  development  of  satipaììhåna  is  the  development  of  right  understanding  
that   sees   visible   object,   seeing,   sound,   hearing,   whatever   appears,   as   a  
dhamma that  arises because of the  appropriate conditions. Acharn  Sujin  said  
many times that seeing arises because of eyesense, which is rúpa, and visible  
object  which   is  also  rúpa.  Seeing  experiences  visible   object  or  colour,  it  is  
nåma. It has no shape or form. 
   Acharn Sujin untiringly helps us to understand what is appearing now, such  
as seeing and visible object. She repeats time and again “Is there seeing now?”  
and she explains the characteristic of the dhamma that appears at the present  
moment.  It  is  always  new  to  me  to  hear  again  and  again  about  seeing  and  
visible   object.   Gradually   her   words   become   more   meaningful   so   that  
understanding  of  realities  can  grow,  although  it  may  be   hardly  noticeable.  
Acharn used a simile of a tree with buds. One may not notice that the tree will  
sprout, but one day it will. 
   Seeing has a specific characteristic, it is different from thinking about people  
and  things  we   notice. Visible  object  has  a  specific  characteristic,  it  appears  
through eyesense. People and things do not impinge on the eyesense, they are  
concepts   we   think   of.   We   have   to   be   reminded   of   realities   so   that  
understanding  of  them  can  grow.  Such  understanding  can  condition  direct  
awareness,  but we  should  have  no  expectations,  as  she  often  said.  There  is  
seeing now, but do we study it with mindfulness? We are forgetful of seeing,  
we think rather of persons and things we perceive. 
   Hardness appears many times a day and usually we are forgetful. Hardness  
is experienced by body-consciousness, but this is different from  awareness of  
hardness. When hardness appears, anyone, even a child can tell how hard it is.  
Hardness is experienced by body-consciousness, and this is not awareness. 
   When there  are conditions for the  arising of mindfulness the characteristic  
of  hardness   or   of  the   experience   of  hardness   can   be   understood.   At   such  
moments  one  does  not  cling  to  concepts  such  as  a  hand  or  a  table  that  is  
touched. 
   We  may  think   of  “our  possessions”,   but   through   which   doorway  do  we  
experience possessions? Through eyes only colour is experienced and this falls  
away immediately. Through touch only tangible object is experienced and this  
falls away immediately. What arises because of the appropriate conditions has  
no   owner.   We   have   to   consider   this   again   and   again.   Awareness   and  
understanding of one object at a time as it appears through one doorway at a  
time will lead to detachment from the idea of self and “mine”. 
   Everything  is  dhamma.  We   know  this  by   intellectual  understanding,  but,  
later on, it can be known more deeply by direct understanding. In this way a  
higher level of understanding is reached, the level of insight knowledge. 

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

                                                           Remembrance of the Dhamma ● 9 

We   read  in  the  “Kindred  Sayings”  (IV,  Ch  III,  §81,  a  Number  of  Bhikkhus,  
translated  by Ven.  Bodhi)  that  a  number  of  bhikkhus  told  the  Buddha  that  
sectarians asked them what the purpose of the holy life lived under the ascetic  
Gotama was.  They  asked whether  they  had  answered  rightly  in  saying  that  
this was for the full understanding of suffering, dukkha. The Buddha said that  
this  was  right,  but   if  they  would  ask  what   that  suffering  was   they  should  
answer thus: 

                                                 1 
      “The eye, friends, is suffering... Forms  are suffering... Whatever feeling arises  
      with eye-contact as condition... that too is suffering... the mind is suffering...  
      Whatever feeling arises with mind-contact as condition...that too is suffering: it  
      is for the full understanding of this that the holy life is lived under the Blessed  
      One. This, friends, is that suffering for the full understanding of which the holy  
      is lived under the Blessed One.” 

The Buddha taught the development of right understanding of all dhammas as  
they appear through the six doors. 

At the end of our pilgrimage we spend a few days in Kashmir on houseboats. I  
was  clinging  to  Dhamma  discussions  and  I  asked Acharn  Sujin whether we  
could have a discussion the next day. She answered that we do not know what  
the next moment will bring and that also hearing Dhamma is anattå. 
   The truth has to be applied in daily life. Whatever we hear is conditioned,  
hearing   is   the   result   of   kamma.   Hearing   Dhamma   is   the   result   of   kusala  
kamma;  hearing  is vipåkacitta   which  is  conditioned  and  which   nobody  can  
cause to  arise.  It  is  of no use to wish for the  arising  of  certain vipåkas  or to  
have any expectations. 

Acharn Sujin said that whenever there is more understanding it indicates that  
there   has   been   right   consideration   of   realities.   When   we   consider   and  
investigate  different   dhammas,  this   is  accompanied  by   a  level  of  sati,  sati  
stemming   from  listening  to   the  Dhamma.  In  this   way  direct  awareness  of  
realities will  arise  naturally, without  one  trying  to be  aware.  If  one  tries  to  
make   awareness   arise   it   is   counteractive;   clinging   to   self   obstructs   the  
development of paññå. 
   She also said that nobody can tell whether there will be sati now.  Sati can  
arise before we are thinking about it. We should know the difference between  
forgetfulness  of  dhammas  and  mindfulness  of  one  dhamma  at  a  time  as  it  
appears through  one  doorway.  Otherwise we keep  on talking  about  sati but  
we are ignorant of its characteristic. 
   We may be discouraged to realize that very few moments of sati arise in a  

1   Rúpas, visible objects. 

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

10 ● Alone with Dhamma 

day   or   none   at   all.   Acharn   Sujin   said:   “Instead   of   attending   to   the  
characteristics  of  realities  there  is  thinking  about  them.  But  we   should  not  
have any expectations, otherwise it is me who would like to have progress.” I  
was  grateful  for  such  reminders. Time  and  again  attachment to  result  arises  
but   we   do   not   notice   this.   Acharn   Sujin   said:   “The   development   of  
understanding   has   to   go  along   with   detachment   all   the   way,   and   that   is  
against  the  current  of  life.”  We   are  inclined  to  think  of  a  self  who   has  to  
become proficient. 

People wonder whether there are ways to induce the arising of sati such as the  
development   of   calm.   They   doubt   whether   listening   to   the   Dhamma   is   a  
condition for the arising of sati. 
   We read in the “Gradual Sayings” , Book of the Fours, Ch XXV, §6: 

      “Monks, these four states conduce to growth in wisdom. 
         What four? 
        Association with a good man, hearing Saddhamma, thorough work of mind,  
      and behaviour in accordance with Dhamma. 
         These are the four.” 

 A good man is the translation of sappurisa, which usually denotes an ariyan  
who   is  a  good  friend  in  Dhamma.  Saddhamma  is  true  dhamma.  Thorough  
work of mind  stands for yoniso manasikåra, which  is right  attention to what  
one hears. 
   Behaviour   in   accordance   with   Dhamma   is   dhammånudhammapaìipatti,  
practice in accordance with the Dhamma. It is the application of the Dhamma  
one   has   heard   and   thoroughly   considered   through   the   development   of  
satipaììhåna. 
   When we read that listening is an important condition we should remember  
that also considering the Dhamma and its application are implied. 

During   our   pilgrimage   Acharn   Sujin   emphasized   the   role   of   saññå,  
remembrance,  and  in  particular  remembrance  of  Dhamma  as  the  proximate  
cause of satipaììhåna. 
   Saññå arises with each citta and its function is “marking” and remembering  
the object that citta experiences. At the moment of seeing, saññå marks visible  
object and when seeing has fallen away saññå arising with the following cittas  
performs its function of marking and remembering. It accompanies the cittas  
that  define  and  name what  has been  seen.  On  account  of visible  object we  
think   about   persons   and   things   and   saññå   performs   its   function   while   it  
accompanies thinking. We think time and again of persons, things and events,  
but without saññå there could not be such thinking. Cittas arise and fall away  

----------------------- Page 13-----------------------

                                                      Remembrance of the Dhamma ● 11 

very  rapidly  and  it  seems, that  seeing,  defining  and  thinking  all  arise  at  the  
same   time,   but   only   one   citta   arises   at   a   time.   When   we   recognize   or  
remember things we should know that it is saññå, not self, that is doing so. 
   Lodewijk   remarked   that   memories   of   the   past   can   worry   us.   There   are  
things we  do  not want to  remember, but  memories  still  come back  and this  
shows  that  saññå  is  beyond  control.  Acharn   Sujin  said:  “When  there  is  no  
paññå it is not known that saññå is anattå. We think about it and do not want  
to   have   it,   but   instead   we   should   understand   how   it   arises   because   of  
conditions.” 
   I  said  that   we   are  more   inclined   to   think   than   to   be   directly   aware  of  
realities.  
   Acharn Sujin answered: “Paññå can see the difference between thinking and  
the direct experience of the truth. We cling to wholesome thinking and to the  
importance of self who thinks.” 
   We   usually   remember   concepts   of   people   and   things   and   we   continue  
thinking of them.  Seeing  arises and it experiences only visible object. Acharn  
Sujin said: “No one can change the characteristic of seeing which experiences  
visible object now. But there is not always remembrance of the Dhamma.”  
   Saññå which remembers the Dhamma is different from saññå which arises  
when   thinking   of   concepts.   On   account   of   what   is   seen   we   think   with  
attachment  about  events,  people  and  things  and  are  quite  taken  in  by  our  
thoughts.   However,   gradually   saññå   can   remember   what   we   heard   when  
listening   to   Dhamma.   Saññå   arises   with   intellectual   understanding   of   the  
Dhamma,   it   remembers   the   terms   and   their   meanings   and   when   there   is  
mindfulness saññå can also remember characteristics of realities. Saññå which  
remembers  the  Dhamma  will  be  firmer  so  that  it  will  become  a  proximate  
cause of satipaììhåna. 

   We read in the Expositor (I, Part IV, Chapter 1, 122) about mindfulness: 

      ... Mindfulness has  “not floating away” as its characteristic, unforgetfulness as  
      its function, guarding, or the state of facing the obje ct, as its manifestation,  
      firm remembrance (saññå) or application in mindfulness as regards the body,  
      etc., as proximate cause. It should be regarded as a door-post from being firmly  
      established in the object, and as a  door-keeper from guarding the door of the  
      senses. 

I  had  read  this  text  before  but  I  had  not yet   considered  all  implications  of  
saññå’s  role.  Considering  the  function  of  saññå  helps  us  to  understand why  
listening to the Dhamma is most important. Saññå performs its function when  
we  listen to  the  Dhamma  or  read  Suttas.  If we  are  not  passive  listeners but  
also understand what we hear  or read, we  shall  not be  forgetful.  Saññå  can  

----------------------- Page 14-----------------------

12 ● Alone with Dhamma 

become a firm foundation for the arising of direct awareness of the dhammas  
that  appear. Another word  for  awareness  is  non-forgetfulness. We  are  often  
forgetful  of  nåma  and  rúpa,  but  since we  have  listened  and  considered  the  
Dhamma   there   are   conditions   for   remembrance   of   the   Dhamma   and   this  
supports sati. 
   It  seems to us that  dhammas last,  at least for  some time. We think  of our  
body  as  a  whole  that  exists  because  of  saññå  that  remembers  it.  In  reality  
there are rúpas arising and falling away all the time. When hardness appears it  
seems to last, but  in reality  it falls  away  immediately  and never returns. We  
keep on remembering the hardness that has fallen  away, but very  gradually,  
when   paññå   has   been    developed,   there    can   be   remembrance    of  
impermanence,  anicca  saññå  instead  of  remembrance  of  permanence,  nicca  
saññå. The clinging to the concept of self is so deeply rooted, but when paññå  
has been developed to the stage of enlightenment of the sotåpanna, there will  
be anattå saññå instead of attå saññå. 
     
We read in the Gradual Sayings, Book of the Tens, Ch VI, §6, Ideas, about ten  
kinds of saññå, here translated as ideas: 
     
      Monks, these ten ideas, if made to grow and made much of, are of great fruit,  
      of great profit for plunging into the deathless, for ending up in the deathless.  
      What ten ideas? 
         The idea of the foul, of death, of the repulsiveness in food, of distaste for all  
      the world, the idea of impermanence, of ill in impermanence, of not-self in Ill,  
      the idea of abandoning, of fading, of ending... 

Plunging   into   the   deathless   means   the   attainment   of   nibbåna.   This   sutta  
implies   that   all   these   ten   kinds   of   saññå   are   developed   together   with  
satipaììhåna, otherwise they could not lead to the deathless. 

The following Sutta explains the connection of similar kinds of saññå with the  
“thorough comprehension of lust”. 
   We read in the Gradual Sayings, Book of the Tens, Ch XXII, §8, Lust: 

      Monks, for the thorough comprehension of lust ten qualities should be made to  
      grow. What ten? 
         The idea of the foul, of death, of the repulsiveness in food, of non-delight in  
      all the world, of impermanence, of ill, of the not-self, of abandoning, of fading  
      interest, and the idea of ending... 

Thus, it is emphasized here that paññå leads to detachment  . The arahat has  
thorough comprehension of lobha, so that it can be completely eradicated. 

----------------------- Page 15-----------------------

                                                                                          ● 13 

Chapter 3 

Samatha and Vipassanå 

If  one  is  disturbed  by  strong  defilements  it  is  most  difficult  to  be  aware  of  
one’s akusala cittas. Defilements prevent the  arising of  satipaììhåna. Clinging  
to sense objects may be so strong, it can even motivate akusala kamma patha.  
Should one not develop calm first, so that insight can be developed afterwards  
with more ease? This is  a question that is often  asked,  and in India this was  
also discussed. 

People  of  old  saw  the  disadvantages  of  sense  impressions.  They  knew  that  
seeing is very often followed by attachment. Therefore they developed calm to  
the   degree   of   absorption   concentration,   jhåna ,   so   that   they   would   be  
temporarily   freed   from   sense   impressions   and   the   defilements   arising   on  
account of them. However, defilements are not eradicated by samatha. When  
one emerges from jhåna  insight of all nåmas and rúpas is to be developed so  
that enlightenment can be attained. 
   In the development of samatha paññå must be very keen so that it discerns  
precisely   the   different   cetasikas   that   are   jhå na-factors   which   have   to   be  
developed, and, in order to reach the higher stages of jhå na, one has to know  
which   are  the  coarser jhåna -factors which   have  to  be  abandoned. A   person  
must have accumulated great skill in order to attain jhå na. Paññå is necessary  
so that calm  is  developed in the right way.  One has to know precisely when  
kusala citta  arises  and when  akusala citta. If there is  subtle clinging to calm,  
one may mislead oneself. 
   We  discussed  in  India whether  there  is  a  certain  order  of  development  of  
síla,  samådhi  and  paññå.  It  seems  that  the  texts  of  the  suttas  point  in  this  
direction. 

We read in the Mahåparinibbånasutta  (Dialogues of the Buddha, no.16) that  
the Buddha repeatedly said: 

      Such and such is síla, such and such is concentration, such and such is wisdom. 
         Great becomes the fruit, great is the gain of concentration when it is fully  
      developed by síla. 
         Great becomes the fruit, great is the gain of wisdom when it is fully  
      developed by concentration. Utterly freed from the intoxicants (åsavas) of Lust,  

----------------------- Page 16-----------------------

14 ● Alone with Dhamma 

      of becoming and of ignorance is the mind that is fully developed in wisdom. 

When   one   reads   this   text   it   seems   that   there   has   to   be   síla   first,   then  
concentration and then paññå. We discussed this with Acharn Sujin who said:  
“Can síla and samådhi be fully developed without paññå?” 
   The   sotåpanna   has   fully   developed   síla,   he   cannot   transgress   the   five  
precepts   nor   commit   akusala   kamma   leading   to   an   unhappy   rebirth.   The  
anågåmí  has   fully   developed  calm,  he  has   eradicated  all  clinging  to  sense  
pleasures. Síla and samådhi become fully developed by paññå. 

We read in the Commentary to the Mahåparinibbånasutta: 

      Such and such is síla (virtue), meaning, it is indeed síla, síla to that extent; here  
      it is síla which are the four purities of síla.  
         Samådhi is concentration. Wisdom should be understood as insight wisdom  
      (vipassanå). 
         As to the words, when it is fully developed by síla, this means, when he has  
      abided in that síla etc., these produce concentration accompanying the path- 
      consciousness and fruition-consciousness; when this is fully developed by that  
      síla it is of great fruit and of great benefit.  
         When he has abided in this concentration, they produce wisdom  
      accompanying the path-consciousness and fruition-consciousness, and this,  
      when it is fully developed by this concentration, is of great fruit, of great  
      benefit.  
         When he has abided in this wisdom, they produce the path-consciousness  
      and fruition-consciousness, and thus when it is fully developed by this (wisdom)  
      he is completely freed from the intoxicants. 

Thus, when we  read  about  full  development  this  pertains  to  lokuttara  cittas  
arising at the different stages of enlightenment. 

The   “Visuddhimagga”,   in   the   Chapter   on   Virtue,   Síla,   gives   the   following  
fourfold classification of purity of síla  (pårisuddhi síla): 

      the restraint of “Påìimokkha” including 227 rules of discipline for the monk, 
      the restraint of the sense faculties (indriya saóvara síla), 
      the purity of livelihood (åjíva pårisuddhi síla), 
      the use of the four requisites of robe, dwelling, food and medicines, that is  
      purified by reflection (paccaya sannissita síla). 

As   regards   restraint   of   the   sense   faculties,   there   are   different   levels   of  
restraint. We read in the “Middle Length Sayings”  (no. 27, Lesser Discourse on  

----------------------- Page 17-----------------------

                                                            Samatha and Vipassanå ● 15 

the Simile of the Elephant’s Footprint) that the Buddha spoke to the brahman  
Jåùussoùi about the monk who has restraint as to the sense-faculties: 

      ... Having seen visible object wit h the eye he is not entranced by the general  
      appearance, he is not entranced by the detail. If he dwells with this organ of  
      sight uncontrolled, covetousness and dejection, evil unskilled states of mind,  
      might predominate. So he fares along controlling it; he guards the organ of  
      sight, he comes to control over the organ of sight.... 

The   Buddha   taught   satipaììhåna   so   that   the   wrong   view   of   self   can   be  
eradicated.   Through   satipaììhåna   right   understanding   is   developed   and  
without satipaììhåna síla cannot become “well established”. For the sotåpanna  
who has developed vipassanå, síla is “well established”.  Satipaììhåna includes  
training  in  “higher  síla”  (adhi-síla  sikkhå),  “higher  citta”  (adhi-citta  sikkhå)  
and “higher wisdom”  (adhi-paññå sikkhå). 
   Instead  of  thinking  of  classifications  and  names  or  thinking  of  a  specific  
order   as   to   the   development   of   síla,   concentration   and   paññå,   we   can  
gradually   develop   understanding   of  the   nåma   and   rúpa   appearing   at  this  
moment and this is training in higher síla, higher citta and higher paññå. 
   As to higher citta or concentration, this includes all levels of concentration,  
not   merely   jhå na.   Concentration,   samådhi,   is   the   cetasika   which   is   one- 
pointedness,  ekaggatå cetasika. It  arises with each  citta  and has the function  
of   focussing   the   citta   on   one   object.   When   satipaììhåna   arises,   ekaggatå  
cetasika  “concentrates”  for  that   short  moment  on  the  nåma  or  rúpa  which  
appears so that understanding of that reality can develop. In the development  
of  samatha concentration is developed to  a high degree  so that jhåna  can be  
attained,   but   this   cannot   be   achieved   without   paññå   which   has   right  
understanding   of   the   citta   and   cetasikas   which   develop   calm.   In   the  
“Visuddhimagga” all levels of concentration, jhåna included, are described, but  
this   does  not   mean   that   everybody   must   develop jhåna   in   order  to   attain  
enlightenment. 

We   read   in   the   Tipiìaka   about  jhåna ,   but   we   should   remember   that   the  
Commentaries   distinguish   between   two   kinds   of   jhåna.   We   read   in   the  
Commentary to the Sallekhasutta  (M.N. I, sutta 8) about two meanings of the  
expression: meditate  (jhåyathå). The objects  of meditation  or contemplation,  
jhåna,   can   be   the   thirty-eight   objects   of   samatha   or   the   characteristics  
beginning   with   impermanence   (anicca)  of  the   khandhas   and  the   åyatanas  
 (sense-fields).   The   Commentary   states:   “It   is   said:   ‘Develop   samatha   and  
vipassanå’.” It repeats that one should not be negligent. 
   We  read  in  the   Subcommentary  to   this   passage:   “With  mindfulness   and  
clear   comprehension   (sati-sampajañña),   which   means:   by   grasping   with  

----------------------- Page 18-----------------------

16 ● Alone with Dhamma 

thorough comprehension.” 
     
Acharn  Sujin said: “One  says that calm is helpful, but why does one not  say:  
all moments  of kusala  are helpful? If one has more kusala  cittas in daily life  
there is also calm. Why does one not develop more kusala in daily life instead  
of high levels of calm?” 
   Any kind of kusala through body, speech and mind brings calm, and at such  
moments one does not think of oneself or one’s problems. Each kusala citta is  
accompanied by calm  (passaddhi). 
   Different kinds of kusala have been classified as the ten bases of meritorious  
deeds  and these  can be  developed  in  daily life. These  include three kinds  of  
dåna:  giving  away useful things to  others,  appreciating the kusala  of  others,  
and extending merit, which means: making known one’s kusala to others, no  
matter whether  they  are  alive  or have  passed  away  to  another  plane where  
they are able to rejoice in one’s kusala. Moreover, they include three kinds of  
síla:  abstaining  from  akusala,   helping   others  and  paying  respect  to  others.  
Then there is bhåvanå, which includes:  studying  or  explaining the Dhamma,  
samatha and vipassanå. 
   Furthermore, the tenth base is rectifying one’s views  (diììhujukamma). This  
is connected with all other kinds of kusala and there are different degrees of  
it. One degree of rectifying one’s views is knowing the value of kusala and the  
disadvantage   of   akusala.   Another   level   is   understanding   that   one   can  
eliminate akusala by means of generosity, síla and other good deeds. Another  
degree  is knowing that  one  can  subdue  defilements by  developing  calm  and  
another level is understanding that paññå can be developed with the purpose  
to  eradicate  defilements.  The  ten  bases   of  meritorious  deeds  show  us  that  
there  are  always  opportunities  for kusala  in  daily  life. When we  read  in the  
texts about calm we should not forget that there are many kinds and degrees  
of calm. Calm does not only pertain to the calm of jhåna, but also to calm that  
accompanies  the  different ways  of  kusala  performed  in  daily  life,  dåna,  síla  
and bhåvanå, mental development. 
   We  read  in  the  subcommentary  to  the  Satipaììhånasutta  (M.N.  10)  about  
meditation subjects that can condition calm in daily life: 

      The words, the meditation subjects on all occasions, mean: recollection of the  
      Buddha, loving-kindness, mindfulness of death, and meditation of foulness. 
         This set of four meditations which is guarded by the yogi (practitioner), he  
      called ‘the meditation subjects on all occasions’. 
         They should be guarded by the power of thorough comprehension,  
      uninterruptedly, with sati that is called samatha, calm, because of its being  
      included in the group of concentration, samådhi. 

----------------------- Page 19-----------------------

                                                               Samatha and Vipassanå ● 17 

The   factors   of   the   eightfold   Path   can   be   classified   as   three   divisions:   as  
wisdom,   síla  and  samådhi,  concentration  or  calm.  Right  understanding  and  
right thinking constitute the wisdom of the eightfold Path, right speech, action  
and  livelihood  the  síla  of  the  eightfold  Path,  and  sati,  right  effort  and  right  
concentration the calm of the eightfold Path. The factors of the eightfold Path  
are   developed   together.   When   right   understanding   develops,   also   calm  
develops together with it. 
   The  four  meditation  subjects  mentioned  above  are very  suitable  for  daily  
life, for all occasions  (sabbatthika). There may be conditions for their arising,  
but  one  should  not  cling  to  such  moments. When  calm  arises  there  can  be  
awareness and right understanding of it as a type of nåma. Kusala, akusala, all  
types of dhammas arise because of their own conditions and nobody can make  
them arise or prevent them from arising. 
   When   we   develop   understanding   of  nåma   and   rúpa   we   can   think   with  
gratefulness  of  the  Buddha   who   taught  us  the  Path  leading  to  the  end  of  
defilements.  This  is  a  short  recollection  of  the  Buddha  and  at  that  moment  
mindfulness can arise of kusala citta as a conditioned nåma which is non-self. 
   In  addition,  loving-kindness  is  to be  developed  in  daily  life.  However, we  
should know that it is very difficult to  see the difference between true mettå  
and  selfish  affection, which  is  called the  near  enemy  of  mettå. Akusala  citta  
follows upon kusala citta very closely and they succeed one another extremely  
rapidly. We are likely to mislead ourselves time and again and take for kusala  
what is akusala. 
   In India we were time and again disturbed, even molested by beggars, and  
we were inclined to turn away from them. Acharn  Sujin said that if we think  
of  life  as  a beggar,  of kamma that  conditions  such vipåka, kusala  citta with  
compassion   and   loving-kindness   can   arise   instead   of   akusala   citta   with  
aversion. We can see other people, beggars included, as our children. At such  
moments we  can  notice  that  kusala  citta  has  a  characteristic  different  from  
akusala  citta.  When  kusala   citta  arises,  we  are  calm  and  not  disturbed  by  
someone  else’s   contrarious  behaviour.   Both  samatha  and  vipassanå   can  be  
developed together in daily life. 

We  read that when bhikkhus wanted to leave the  order the  Buddha  advised  
them to  contemplate  asubha, foulness. When  one  contemplates  foulness  one  
does  not  indulge  in  sense  pleasures.  Some  people  believe   that,  before   one  
develops satipaììhåna, one should subdue sense desires by focussing the mind  
on  foulness.  This,  however  is  not  correct.  There  is  no  rule  that  one  should  
perform   particular   actions   before   one   develops   satipaììhåna.   Through  
satipaììhåna right understanding  is  developed of whatever dhamma  appears,  
be it kusala or akusala. But also when one thinks of foulness, sati can be aware  
of a reality, for example of the dhamma that thinks of foulness. 

----------------------- Page 20-----------------------

18 ● Alone with Dhamma 

   The   contemplation   of   foulness   can   lead   one   to   a   deeper   way   of  
contemplation,  the  realization  of  impermanence.  This  is  the  development  of  
insight. 

We read in the Theragåthå, Canto CXVIII, Kimbila, that the Buddha, in order  
to stir him, conjured up  a beautiful woman in her prime, and showed her to  
him passing to old age. 
   Kimbila uttered the verse: 

      As bidden by some power age over her falls. 
      Her shape is as another, yet the same. 
      Now this myself, who never have left myself, 
      Seems other than the self I recollect. 

Thus, when  a person becomes  older his body  change  although he  is  still the  
same individual. The body consists of rúpas that arise and fall away. 
   What  arises  and  falls  away   is  not  beautiful,  not  attractive.  The  colour  a  
person sees is only colour, not feminine beauty. That colour falls away, never  
to return. Where is the beauty? 
   At the first  stage  of principal  insight the  arising  and falling  away  of nåma  
and   rúpa   is   realized.   Kimbila   listened   to   the   Buddha   and   developed  
understanding. 

One may want realities to be different from what they are, but the dhammas  
that have arisen already cannot be changed. One may unknowingly cling to an  
idea of a self who must subdue lobha and dosa. One may cling to the idea of  
wanting to be a good person without defilements. When one fails to suppress  
lobha and dosa there is frustration and disappointment, even despair. 
   We may  notice that we have  aversion,  dosa, but we  do  not realize  it  as  a  
dhamma, arising because of its proper conditions. At the first stage of insight,  
the   difference   between   the   characteristic   of   nåma   and   of   rúpa   is   clearly  
realized, not before that. One begins to understand nåma as nåma and rúpa as  
rúpa. This means, we begin to  see the nåma that  appears  as  a  dhamma  and  
the rúpa that appears as a dhamma. 
   Before   this   stage   of   insight   is   attained,   there   is   still   a   notion   of   “my  
aversion”,   and   “my   attachment”,   even   though   we   have   intellectual  
understanding of the fact that they are cetasikas, non-self. We have not really  
penetrated the truth of anattå. 
   Acharn   Sujin   said:   “You   have   to   understand   your   own   life,   your  
accumulated inclinations, otherwise you can never become a  sotåpanna. One  
should be very  courageous  in  order to  develop the  real Path,  not the wrong  
Path.” 

----------------------- Page 21-----------------------

                                                                                     ● 19 

Chapter 4 

The Present Moment 

Acharn Sujin brought us back to the present moment time and again by asking  
us: “Is there no seeing now?” I was glad because I am always inclined to think  
of  concepts  about  people  and  things  I  perceive.  Concepts  are  not  objects  of  
vipassanå, they are different from visible object, sound, and all the objects that  
appear through the six doorways. However, thinking itself is a citta and it can  
be an object of insight. 
   We  discussed  seeing  and visible  object  time  and  again. Visible   object  is  a  
rúpa that impinges on the eyesense. It is experienced by seeing-consciousness  
that arises in a process of cittas. Visible object or colour is an extremely small  
rúpa arising in a group of rúpas, it does not arise alone. It arises together with  
the  four  Great  Elements  of  solidity,  cohesion, heat,  motion,  and  other  rúpas  
which support it. It falls away immediately and soon afterwards it arises and  
falls  away  again.  There  is  not  one  unit  of visible  object but  countless  units  
arising   and   falling   away.   We   cannot   pinpoint   which   visible   object   is  
experienced  at  the  present  moment.  There  is  only  an  impression  or  mental  
image, nimitta, of visible object. This causes us to think that visible object does  
not fall away. 
   The following sutta deals with the notion of ‘sign’ or mental image, nimitta. 
   We  read  in  the  Kindred  Sayings  (IV,  Ch  II,  §80,  Ignorance,  translated by  
Ven.  Bodhi)  that   a  bhikkhu   asked  the   Buddha  whether   there  is  one  thing  
through the abandoning of which ignorance is abandoned and true knowledge  
arises. 
   We read that the Buddha answered: “Ignorance, bhikkhu, is that one thing  
through the  abandoning  of which  ignorance  is  abandoned by  a bhikkhu  and  
true knowledge arises.” 

Ven. Bodhi states in a note to this passage: “Though it may sound redundant  
to say that ignorance must be abandoned in order to abandon ignorance, this  
statement underscores the fact that ignorance is the most fundamental cause  
of bondage, which must be eliminated to eliminate all the other bonds.” 

We read further on: 

     Here, bhikkhu, a bhikkhu has heard, ‘Nothing is worth adhering to’. When a  

----------------------- Page 22-----------------------

20 ● Alone with Dhamma 

      bhikkhu has heard,  ‘Nothing is worth adhering to’, he directly knows  
      everything. Having directly known everything, he fully understands everything.  
      Having fully understood everything, he sees all signs (nimitta) differently. He  
      sees the eye differently, he sees forms differently...whatever feeling arises with  
      mind-contact as condition... that too he sees differently... 

As to the term adhere, this pertains to clinging with wrong view. 
   The   Commentary   explains   the   words,   “he   sees   all   signs   differently  
(sabbanimittåni   aññato   passati)”   as   follows:   “He   sees   all   the   signs   of  
formations  (saòkhåranimittåni)  in  a way   different  from  that  of  people who  
have not fully understood the adherences. For such people see all signs as self,  
but one who has fully understood the adherences sees them as non-self, not as  
self. Thus in this sutta the characteristic of non-self is discussed.” 

In this Commentary the word “saòkhåra-nimitta”, the nimittas, signs or mental  
images, of conditioned dhammas, is used. When we were returning from the  
Bodhi tree walking up the long  stairways,  a friend  asked Acharn  Sujin  about  
this term. Nimitta has different meanings in different contexts. The nimitta or  
mental image in samatha refers to the meditation subject of samatha. We also  
read in some texts that one should not be taken in by the outward appearance  
of things  (nimitta)  and the details. However, the term saòkhåranimitta has a  
different meaning as I shall explain further on. 
   Acharn  Sujin emphasized that whatever we read in the texts about nimitta  
should  be  applied  to  our  life  now.  “What we  read  is  not  theory”  she  often  
explains. 

We   read  in  the  “Mahåvedallasutta”  (Middle  Length  Sayings,  no  43),  about  
freedom of mind that is “signless”, and we read that there are two conditions  
for attaining this: “non-attention  (amanasikåra) to all “signs” and attention to  
the signless element”. The Commentary states that the signs, nimittas, are the  
objects such as visible object, etc. and that the signless is nibbåna. The signless  
liberation   of  mind   is  explained  in   a  way   that   clearly  connects  it  with   the  
fruition  of  arahantship:  lust,  hatred  and  delusion  are  declared  to  be  “sign- 
makers” (nimittakarana), which the arahant has totally abandoned. 
     When we  read  about  object  (årammaùa)  as  a  sign, we  should  remember  
that  this  is  not  theory. An   object  is  what  citta  experiences  at  this  moment.  
When  the  rúpa  that  is  the  eye-base  has  not  fallen  away  yet   and  colour  or  
visible object impinges on it, there  are conditions for the arising of  seeing. If  
there were no citta which sees visible object could not appear. 
   When we asked Acharn Sujin whether the impression or sign  (nimitta) of a  
dhamma is a concept or a reality she answered: “These are only words. If we  
use the word concept there is  something that is experienced by thinking. We  

----------------------- Page 23-----------------------

                                                                   The Present Moment ● 2 1 

should  not j ust  know  words,   but   understand  the  reality  that  appears  right  
now. There is not merely one moment of experiencing visible object, but many  
moments arising and falling away. When right understanding arises we do not  
have to use any term.” 
   She  repeated  that  there  is  the  impression  of visible  object  right  now.  She  
said: “It is this moment.” Visible object impinges on the eyesense and after it  
has fallen away, what is left is the impression or sign, nimitta of visible object. 
   It seems that visible object lasts for a while, but in reality it arises and falls  
away. Acharn  Sujin  used  the  simile  of  a  torch that  is  swung  around.  In  this  
way, we have the impression of a whole, of a circle of light. 
   We know that seeing arises at this moment, but we cannot pinpoint the citta  
which sees, it arises and falls away very rapidly and another moment of seeing  
arises. We only experience the “sign” of seeing. 
   The  notion  of  nimitta  can  remind  us  that  not just   one  moment  of  seeing  
appears,  but  many  moments  that  are  arising  and  falling  away.  Also   visible  
object is not as solid as we would think, there are many moments arising and  
falling away which leave the sign or impression of visible object. 
   Visible  object  that  was   experienced  by  cittas  of  a  sense-door  process  has  
fallen away; sense-door processes and mind-door processes of cittas alternate  
very rapidly. Visible object impinges  again  and  again and  seeing  arises  again  
and  again. When  their  characteristics  appear we  cannot  count  the  different  
units of rúpa or the cittas that see, they arise and fall away; the impression of  
what is seen and of the seeing appears. 
   Acharn   Sujin   said:   “No   matter   whether   we   call   it   nimitta   or   not,   it   is  
appearing now. Whatever  appears  is the  sign or nimitta of the dhamma that  
arises and falls away.” 
   We cling to what appears for a very short moment, but is does not remain.  
It is the  same with  saññå, there is not one moment of  saññå that marks  and  
remembers, but countless moments, arising and falling away. 
   Thus, we can speak of the nimitta of each of the five khandhas: of rúpa, of  
feeling, of  saññå, of  saòkhårakkhandha, of  consciousness. There  are nimittas  
of  all  conditioned  dhammas  that  appear  at  this  moment,  arising  and  falling  
away extremely rapidly. 
   Seeing  arising  at  this  moment  sees visible  object. We  notice visible  object  
and while we notice it, we have a vivid impression of it, but it has just  fallen  
away. Seeing falls away but extremely shortly after it has fallen away another  
moment  of  seeing  arises  that  experiences visible   object.  It  arises  again  and  
again and in between one notices that there is seeing, or, if there are the right  
conditions   a   citta   with   sati   can   arise   that   is   mindful   of   its   characteristic.  
However, mindfulness of seeing arises after seeing has fallen away, not at the  
same time as seeing. 
   People are wondering how one can be mindful of anger, dosa. Mindfulness  

----------------------- Page 24-----------------------

22 ● Alone with Dhamma 

that  accompanies  kusala  citta  cannot  arise  at  the  same  time  as  anger  that  
accompanies akusala citta. 
   Anger,   dosa,  arises  and  falls  away  and  other  processes  of  citta with  dosa  
arise  again.  In between,  sati  can be  aware  of  its  characteristic, just   as in the  
case   of   seeing   that   has   fallen   away.   Awareness   of   dosa   is   different   from  
thinking  of:  “I have  dosa, there  is  dosa.” But  also  such thinking  can  arise  in  
between. Understanding can develop in considering the characteristics of the  
dhammas that appear and there is no need to think: “It has fallen away”, or,  
“This is remembrance”. 
   We  have  to  face  akusala  with   courage  and  sincerity,  otherwise  we  shall  
always  cling  to  an  idea  of  “my  dosa”,  or  “my  lobha”. Wrong view has  to be  
eradicated first, before lobha and dosa can be eradicated. 
   I quote what Acharn Sujin said at an earlier occasion: “When akusala arises  
it can remind us of the truth about our accumulations and this is the way to  
develop   paññå.   Ignorance   conditions   more   akusala   and   paññå   conditions  
kusala.”   People   may   be   distressed   when   they   notice   akusala,   but   at   the  
moment of understanding the citta is kusala, it is free of disturbance. 
   Some  people   may   believe   that   they   have   to   apply   energy   and   perform  
specific  actions  so  that  they  have  less  akusala  cittas  and  more  moments  of  
mindfulness.   Listening   and   considering   are   conditions   for   the   arising   of  
insight. But there are other conditions stemming from the past: kusala in the  
past   conditions   our   interest   at   this   moment   to   consider   and   investigate  
realities.  This  process has been  set  in  motion  already,  there  is  not  a  person  
who could regulate this. 
   Nobody  can  create  conditions  for  the  arising  of  sati.  Acharn   Sujin  asked  
several times:  “Can you  create hardness  now?” Nobody  can  create  anything,  
because dhammas arise because of their own conditions. 
   Hardness is the rúpa that is solidity or the Element of Earth. This rúpa arises  
and falls away all the time in split-seconds. If  someone says: create hardness  
now, it is impossible, it has already arisen and fallen away and then there is a  
new   hardness  in  another  group  of  rúpas.  It  is  present  with  every  group  of  
rúpas, it supports other rúpas in that group. It arises with sound, with visible  
object, with  any  other  type  of  rúpa. All  of  them  arise because  there  are  the  
right conditions. It may seem that one can create sound, but without the right  
conditions  it  is  impossible.  It  is  the   same  with   sati  and  paññå,  which   are  
sobhana cetasikas. Nobody  can create them. We  are not  a creator, master or  
owner of any dhamma. 

When we were  in  India, we were  sometimes  sick, we had  a  fever  or violent  
pains due to water, food or climate. Acharn  Sujin reminded us then to know  
the   characteristic   of   the   present   reality,   for   when   there   is   thinking   about  
tonight or tomorrow or worrying about it obviously there is too much interest  

----------------------- Page 25-----------------------

                                                               The Present Moment ● 23 

in ‘self’.  She also felt sick, mostly from a severe cold, and exhausted at times  
but she did not show it. She never thinks of herself. 
   When we read the many suttas about dhammas appearing through the  six  
doors we can be reminded of the truth. The Buddha taught all the time about  
the dhammas  appearing through the  six doors. There is only the dhamma of  
this moment, nothing  else, this is the truth. Nobody  can  cause the  arising of  
specific  dhammas.  When  feeling  sick,  that  is  the  dhamma  at  this  moment.  
There  are only dhammas, not me who feels sick. We cling to our feeling, we  
are  commiserating  with   ourselves,  and  also  that   is  a  dhamma.  We   cannot  
escape nåma and rúpa, so long as we are living in this world. 
   Acharn  Sujin said that there can be understanding of the dhamma that has  
already  arisen because  of  conditions.  If we understand  dhamma  as  dhamma  
we   know   that   nobody   can   interfere   with   what   arises   because   of   the  
appropriate conditions. We may have intellectual understanding of anattå, but  
we  should  come to understand the reality that  is  anattå.  She  said:  “There  is  
always  an  idea  of  I  who   is  reflecting,  but   actually,  citta  and  cetasikas  are  
performing their functions and then they fall away immediately.” 
   Acharn Sujin reminded us that it is not sufficient to think that everything is  
anattå. Precisely  at this very  moment we  must try to understand  anattå. We  
are  alone,  only  dhammas  appear  one  at  a  time  through  the  senses  and  the  
mind-door. We think time and again of people we love, we find our thoughts  
about them very important. But what we take for people are dhammas arising  
and falling away immediately. What has fallen away never returns. 
   We have to develop paññå at this moment so that we shall understand the  
truth  of  anattå.  There  is  seeing  at  this  moment  and very  gradually  we  can  
learn that it is a dhamma that sees. 
   Jonothan   remarked   that   one   should   be   honest   with   regard   to   one’s  
defilements. Truthfulness, sacca, is one of the perfections that the Bodhisatta  
developed during countless lives. Lodewijk said that he found the perfection of  
Truthfulness  essential,  but   very   difficult  to  develop.  When  he  reads  in  the  
Sutta that the Buddha said, ‘Abandon evil... it can be done...’ he feels that he is  
insincere, since he clings to all the pleasant things of life and does not want to  
give them up. He said that before one realizes it, one is misleading oneself as  
to kusala and akusala. 
   Jonothan   said   that   there   are   moments   of   understanding   dhammas,   and  
moments of ignorance. When there is awareness and right understanding of a  
dhamma one is on the Path the Buddha taught. Actually, being on the Path is  
momentary,  and when understanding does not  arise, which happens most of  
the time, the Path is not developed. However, he said, this is not a cause for  
concern. Even when the moments of developing the Path are very few, it is a  
great gain hearing the right Dhamma and listening to it with sincere interest.  
There   can   be   moments   of   reflecting,   considering,   moments   of  kusala   and  

----------------------- Page 26-----------------------

24 ● Alone with Dhamma 

paññå. 
   We  may  reflect  on  the  Path  leading  to  enlightenment,  but  Acharn   Sujin  
always says: “But what about this moment?” 
   I find it very helpful to remember that citta and the Path-factors which are  
cetasikas  arise  for  a  moment  and  then  fall  away. This  is  in  conformity with  
real life. 
   Lodewijk said that it seemed to him that he had more understanding when  
in   India,   visiting   the   holy   places.   But   now   it   seems   that   the   little  
understanding he had is lost when he is back in the routine of life in Holland. I  
reminded him of what Jonothan had said to him in India about the Path being  
momentary.  It  is  good  to be  reminded  that  the  moments  of  sati  and  paññå  
arise  and  fall  away  and  that we  cannot  keep  them.  The  understanding  that  
arises is never lost, it is accumulated and it can grow. 
   Acharn Sujin reminded us: “The Buddha explained what is kusala and what  
akusala, but can he force anyone? He could show the way leading to the end  
of defilements. Someone may like to have sati, but who can have it if there are  
no  conditions  for  it?  One  may want the  dhammas that  arise to be  different,  
but  instead  of  such  clinging  there  should be  detachment.  One  may  try very  
hard to make sati arise, but if there is no understanding of it as a conditioned  
reality that arises and falls away it is useless. 
   And   on  the   other  hand,   when   there   are  conditions   for  sati  nobody  can  
prevent its arising. This shows us that there is no need to try to have sati. 
   The entire Tipiìaka explains the nature of anattå of realities. The arising of  
direct awareness and understanding depends on the right conditions and they  
cannot arise even if one is told a hundred times.” 
   When  we   were   in   India  we   had   many   opportunities  to   rejoice  in  other  
people’s   kusala,   their   generosity   and   readiness   to   help   others.   Jonothan  
performed kusala all day long, without interruption, in recording the Dhamma  
discussions. He applied a great deal of effort to hold the microphone close to  
Acharn Sujin. 
   When   Lodewijk   said  that   he   was   distracted   by   this,   I   said   to   him   that  
Jonathan develops all the perfections while doing this. He performs dåna, he  
gives the great gift of Dhamma. He performs  síla while helping many people  
by bodily acts, while holding the microphone so that people all over the world  
can   hear   our   dhamma   discussions.   He   develops   renunciation   since   he  
renounces his own comfort while he has little time for relaxation. He develops  
wisdom   while   listening   with   understanding,   and   asking  questions   that   are  
useful  to  all.  He  applies  energy  since  he  is  not  inert  to  perform wholesome  
deeds. He has patience and endurance which is needed day after day in order  
to continue to perform kusala. He develops truthfulness to perform the kusala  
he has determined to do: acting according to what he has promised he would  
do.  He  has  determination   to  perform  kusala  and  continue  with   it.  He  has  

----------------------- Page 27-----------------------

                                                                    The Present Moment ● 25 

mettå   because   he   thinks   of   many   people’s   benefit   and   welfare.   He   has  
equanimity because even when he is tired he continues with equanimity in all  
circumstances. 
   This shows that  all the perfections can be developed together,  at the  same  
time. We do not have to think about the perfections; they are developed while  
we  perform  kusala  through body,  speech  and  mind without  thinking  of  our  
own gain or profit. Jonothan and Sarah are always working hard to edit all the  
recordings of Dhamma discussions just  for our benefit. They even listened to  
them and edited them during our long bus drives.  
   At the beginning  of  this  pilgrimage  Lodewijk  stated  categorically  that  this  
would   be   his   last   trip   to   India.   At   the   end   of   the   trip,   however,   on   the  
houseboat in Srinagar, he said just as categorically that he would definitely go  
on   the   next   pilgrimage.   Why?   The   holy   places,   the   discussions   and   the  
recollection of the Buddha had inspired him to go back to India in order better  
to be able to understand the Truth, wherever we go and live. And so it should  
be for all of us. 
