   Chapter 3
   
   Satipaììhåna
   
   The Buddha taught satipaììhåna, the development of right understanding of paramattha dhammas. When there is mindfulness, sati, of a reality right understanding of that reality can be developed. Sati is a sobhana cetasika which accompanies each sobhana citta, it is non-forgetful of what is wholesome. There are different levels of sati: there is sati when we perform deeds of generosity, dåna; there is sati of the level of síla, which is non-forgetful to abstain from akusala; there is sati with mental development, which includes the development of samatha, calm, the study of the Dhamma and the development of insight. When samatha is developed, sati is mindful of the meditation subject, and when insight, vipassanå, is developed, sati is mindful of the nåma or rúpa appearing through one of the six doors. 
   The term satipaììhåna 1 has three meanings. It can mean the object of which sati is mindful, classified as the four Applications of mindfulness, including all conditioned nåmas and rúpas 2. It can mean sati cetasika which is mindful of realities. It can also mean the Path the Buddha and his disciples followed towards the realization of the four noble Truths. 
   When we hear the word “mindfulness” we should remember that its meaning in the Buddhist sense is different from what we used to understand by mindfulness or awareness. When we say in conventional language that we are mindful, we mean that we know what we are doing, and such a way of thinking may be accompanied by lobha, attachment. Sati cannot accompany akusala citta. Sati of satipaììhåna is wholesome, and it is mindful of one nåma or rúpa at a time. When there is mindfulness of the characteristic of a reality which appears direct understanding of that reality can gradually develop, until the truth of non-self can be realized. 
   We may have theoretical understanding of cittas which experience objects through the six doorways, but when there are conditions for the arising of sati it can be directly aware of the characteristic of the nåma or rúpa which appears. Theoretical understanding of realities is the foundation for the development of satipaììhåna, but if there is no sati one’s knowledge is only superficial; there is no development of paññå which directly penetrates the true nature of realities so that the clinging to the “self” can be eradicated. During this journey Khun Sujin stressed time and again the immense difference between theoretical understanding and direct understanding. We may have learnt that citta and cetasika are different. Citta is the leader in knowing an object and cetasikas have each their own characteristic and function. Citta and cetasikas arise together, but they have different characteristics. We may believe that we notice akusala citta with anger, but that is only thinking, and there is still an idea of “my anger”. Theoretical knowledge is not the direct understanding of realities. When paññå has been developed in vipassanå there can be direct understanding of the nature of citta and cetasika, of kusala and akusala, without an idea of self. It takes an endlessly long time, many lives, to develop satipaììhåna, but even if there is a short moment of right understanding of nåma and rúpa we are on the right way.
   Khun Sujin said that when we begin to develop understanding we should not think too much of the words satipaììhåna or stages of insight, because then we are likely to cling to something for which there are no conditions yet. The objects of sati are ordinary realities of daily life like hearing, sound, hardness or feeling. We believe that we see this or that person, we are forgetful of the characteristic of visible object. What appears through the eyes is a reality, a rúpa, but it falls away very quickly. We recognize people, they seem to be there all the time, they do not seem to fall away. At such a moment we are thinking of concepts, and the concepts hide the paramattha dhammas. It seems that we hear the sound of hammering or the sound of birds because time and again thinking of conventional terms arises. In between thinking sati can arise and realize the characteristic of sound: that which can be heard, which has a degree of loudness. At that short moment there is no notion of people or things in the sound, sati can be directly aware of its characteristic. When sound appears there must also be the nåma which experiences it; if there were no citta how could sound appear? There could not be thinking of birds if there were no hearing of sound. We can learn the difference between the moment of sati and the moment of forgetfulness. We need to listen time and again so that we can understand the difference between these moments. Only in that way can we come to know the characteristic of sati and when we know this sati can be accumulated.
   I said to Khun Sujin that I become nervous when I hear that we should know the difference between the moment of sati and the moment without sati. When we become nervous it shows that there is clinging to sati and then it cannot be developed. It is of no use to worry about lack of sati or to wonder what we can do so that sati can arise. Someone thought that considering the characteristics of impermanence, dukkha and anattå would be a favorable condition for the arising of sati. That may be only thinking with the desire for sati and this will not be helpful. Right understanding of the realities appearing through the doors of the senses and the mind-door should be developed until paññå can realize the three characteristics of impermanence, dukkha and anattå. Merely thinking about birth, old age and death is not the realisation of the truth. The conditioned dhammas which arise fall away immediately but we should not have desire for the direct experience of the arising and falling away of nåma and rúpa. This is only realized at the fourth stage of insight, which is the first stage of mahå-vipassanå (principal insight) 3. We are  forgetful of the nature of anattå of sati and of the stages of insight. When sati does not arise we cannot do anything to cause its arising. Jack said: ”Don’t worry about sati, just develop understanding.” We should listen and consider the Dhamma and understand each time a little more what rúpa is and what nåma is.  
   Khun Sujin explained the difference between the moment there is sati and the moment without sati several times. We may touch different things which are hard, but the characteristic of hardness does not appear when there is no sati. The thinking of conventional truth comes in all the time when we touch a book, a glass or a table. When there are conditions for mindfulness, sati can be aware of the characteristic of hardness, but this moment is extremely short. When it has fallen away there may be thinking again. Because of saññå, remembrance, we think immediately of the thing we touch and do not consider the characteristic of hardness. Hardness is a characterstic of a rúpa which can be directly experienced through the bodysense. We do not have to think about it in order to experience it. 
   What appears through the bodysense is real but it falls away immediately. When sati arises, it may be aware of hardness, but only very shortly; at that moment understanding of that reality can develop so that it can be seen as just a kind of rúpa, and there is no notion of a glass or table which is hard. In this way we can learn that being aware of hardness is different from touching hardness without awareness. When sati arises the reality it is aware of is not different from what appears at this moment, but instead of forgetfulness there is sati which is non-forgetful of realities. We can begin to know that such a moment is a moment of sati. When we understand the characteristic of sati it can be accumulated. But when we cling to sati, when we try to have sati or make an effort to separate realities from concepts we are on the wrong way. When sati arises we cannot help having sati, it is anattå. A moment of sati falls away immediately and after that there may be doubt about realities or ignorance. We cannot help having doubt and ignorance, they are anattå.  
   Hearing Khun Sujin’s explanation about sati only once is not sufficient; we should not expect to grasp the meaning of her words immediately. We have to listen again and again and then gradually we can learn the difference between the moment of sati and the moment there is no sati. When sati is aware of a reality, there will be more understanding from moment to moment, we are on the right way.
   Rúpas such as sound and hardness appear time and again in daily life, their characteristics can be directly experienced. Nåma is more difficult to understand, it is more subtle. We know in theory that when sound appears there must also be hearing which experiences sound, but it is difficult to know the true nature of hearing, to know it as an element which experiences, a kind of nåma, different from rúpa. We do not have to call it nåma, it has the function of experiencing an object. We are so used to taking it for “I”, it is difficult to eradicate the idea of self from seeing or hearing. When we learn to be aware of the reality appearing at this moment there can be some understanding, even if it is very little. It is useful to know that only at the first stage of insight knowledge, vipassanå ñåùa, the difference between the characteristics of nåma and of rúpa are clearly distinguished. Before that stage has been reached we cannot expect to understand nåma as nåma, completely different from rúpa. For example, at this moment there is seeing which sees visible object, but it is difficult to clearly distinguish the difference between seeing and visible object. When sati arises there can be a beginning of right understanding of nåma and rúpa. 
   Some people may wonder what the result is of listening to the Dhamma. I have been listening for more than thirty years and someone asked of what use this was to me. What has it brought me? I find that each moment of listening is most beneficial, since it brings a little more understanding. The Buddha has taught the Dhamma which was unknown to us before. The Dhamma is deep and difficult to understand. We should listen again and again and understand a little more. Thirty years is nothing compared to the aeons it took to bring me to the present day when I can hear the Dhamma again. It took the Bodhisatta an infinitely long time to accumulate understanding to the degree that he could become a Buddha. Each moment of accumulating understanding is beneficial, we do not have to think of the future. The reason that people become bored of hearing the same words about realities is that they hope for something, for the stages of vipassanå ñåùa and for enlightenment. In the scriptures the person who has attained enlightenment, the ariyan, is called “someone who has heard much”, in Påli: bahussutta. He has not only listened much but he also has considered and investigated realities and he has developed satipaììhåna. Thus, we should value each moment of listening, whatever we learn is very precious. I appreciate it immensely that Khun Sujin always brings the listener back to the present moment, when she for example says :
   
   “We have intellectual understanding of nåma and rúpa, but what about this moment? There is the rúpa which is seen at this moment. There can be some understanding, even if it is very little. It is only visible object.” 
   
   We read that nåma and rúpa are elements, dhåtus, and that they can be classified as eighteen elements: the five rúpas which are the sense-organs, the five sense-objects experienced through these sense-organs, the five sense-cognitions, mind-element (mano-dhåtu) 4, dhamma-dhåtu (cetasika, subtle rúpas and nibbåna), mind-consciousness element (mano-viññåùa dhåtu, including all cittas except the sense-cognitions and mind-element). When we read this it is not too difficult to have theoretical understanding. But the Buddha taught the elements to help people to understand that they arise now, that they are anattå, that they have no owner and are beyond control. The whole of his teaching points to the development of satipaììhåna, because what he teaches can be realized by paññå. We read in the “Dialogues of the Buddha” (III, no. 33, The Recital, Sangíti Sutta, Double Doctrines, 10) one sentence, full of meaning:
   
   “Proficiency in elements and in understanding them”.
   
   The Commentary to this sutta, the “Sumaògala Vilåsiní”, explains:
   
   “Proficiency in elements”. Eighteen elements, the element of eye, etc. ...the element of mind-consciousness. When it is said that there is with regard to these elements proficiency in the elements, understanding of them, it means that there is defining of the characteristics of these eighteen elements, paññå based on listening, on bearing in mind, paññå which comprehends and realizes (paìivedha). 
   
   The Påli term “paìiveda” means the realization of the truth by paññå. There is a beginning of the realization of the truth when the stages of insight arise, but it is completed when enlightenment is attained: when the path-consciousness (magga-citta) arises which eradicates defilements and experiences nibbåna, and the fruition-consciousness (phala-citta) arises which is the result of the magga-citta. Paìiveda is the result of the study of the Dhamma (pariyatti) and the practice of vipassanå (paìipatti). The practice has to be in conformity with the study of the Dhamma. Through the practice we begin to verify what we learnt. Paìiveda is the realisation of the truth of what we learnt. 
   When we were in the Jeta Grove Khun Sujin stressed the difference between theoretical knowledge and the understanding acquired through satipaììhåna. She explained this with reference to the knowledge of kamma and vipåka. In the scriptures we read about kamma and vipåka, for example in the “Gradual Sayings” (Book of the Tens, Ch V, § 8, Conditions). In this sutta we read that the monk should contemplate again and again ten conditions. One of these is the knowledge that kamma is one’s own, kammassakata 5 ñåùa. We read:
   
   I myself am responsible for my deed, I am the heir to my deed, the womb of my deed, the kinsman of my deed, I am he to whom my deed comes home. Whatever deed I shall do, be it good or bad, of that shall I be the heir...
   
   We may think about kamma and vipåka, but we cannot really grasp the deep meaning of the Buddha’s teaching if we do not have right understanding of nåma and rúpa, acquired through satipaììhåna. We may still have doubt about the truth of kamma and vipåka. When the first stage of insight arises paññå realizes the true nature of nåma and rúpa without thinking or naming realities. When seeing is the object of vipassanå ñåùa, it is realized as the element which experiences, no self who experiences. It is conditioned, it is vipåka conditioned by kamma. Seeing is also conditioned by eyesense which is a rúpa produced by kamma 6, and by visible object. When there are no conditions dhammas cannot arise. Seeing can be realized as it is by paññå and then there is no need to think about it. Paññå immediately knows its nature as different from kusala citta or akusala citta. At this moment we have to think about realities and we think with an idea of self. We cannot clearly distinguish different cittas such as vipåkacitta and akusala citta. We cannot imagine how paññå can directly understand the truth when we have not reached that stage yet. At the moments of vipassanå ñåùa there is no self and no world full of people and things. Paññå realizes that seeing arises when there are conditions, that nobody can cause the arising of seeing. It realizes that there is no self who receives the result of kamma. Paññå can realize that whatever appears is only an element, no self. Khun Sujin explained that at each stage of vipassanå ñåùa there is kammassakata ñåùa, understanding of kamma and vipåka. At the second stage of vipassanå ñåùa there is the direct understanding of the conditions for nåma and rúpa, but even at the first stage there is kammassakata ñåùa when paññå realizes nåma as nåma and rúpa as rúpa, as non-self. At each subsequent stage of insight the understanding of the true nature of nåma and rúpa grows deeper. 
   At this moment of seeing there can be the development of understanding of the element which experiences. There are the right conditions for the arising of seeing which experiences what appears through the eyes. It is real, it is dhamma. After that we may think about the colour which appears and we live again in the world of people and things. When paññå has been developed in vipassanå it will understand that there is no world, no thing, no doer of deeds and nobody who receives the results of deeds. We read in the “Sumaògala Vilåsíní”, in the Commentary to the Saògíti Sutta where it deals with higher síla, adhisíla, higher citta, adhicitta (citta stands for concentration) and higher paññå, adipaññå 7 , that the paññå which is kammassakata ñåùa is “vipassanå adhipaññå”, higher paññå of vipassanå. This shows us again that the deep understanding of kamma and vipåka is developed through satipaììhåna. 
   Knowledge of kamma and vipåka relates directly to daily life, it is no theory. In the “Greater Discourse on the Simile of the Elephant’s Footprint” (of the “Middle Length Sayings” I, no. 28) Såriputta explains the four noble Truths, the five khandhas and the four great Elements of Earth, Water, Fire and Wind. Earth stands for solidity, Water for cohesion, Fire for temperature and Wind for motion. Solidity can be experienced through the bodysense as hardness or softness, temperature as heat or cold, motion as motion or pressure. Cohesion cannot be experienced through the bodysense, it can only be known through the mind-door. Time and again rúpas impinge on the bodysense but we are forgetful and we do not realize them as elements which are impermanent and not self. Såriputta explains that if a monk is vexed he should have right understanding of realities. We read that Såriputta said to the monks:
   
   “Your reverences, if others abuse, revile, annoy, vex this monk, he comprehends: ‘This painful feeling that has arisen in me is born of ear-contact, it has a cause, not no cause. What is the cause? Ear-contact is the cause.’ He sees that ear-contact is impermanent, he sees that feeling... perception... the habitual tendencies are impermanent, he sees that consciousness is impermanent. His mind rejoices, is pleased, composed and is set on the objects of the element....”
   
   The monk who is even-minded when he is annoyed has developed satipaììhåna to the degree that he realizes “kammassakata ñåùa”. He does not think about other people who annoy him and about the unpleasant object he hears, he realizes directly vipåka which is conditioned by kamma. At that moment there is no world, no other people, no self. 
   We then read that Såriputta said:
   
   “If, your reverences, others comport themselves in undesirable, disagreeable, unpleasant ways towards that monk, and he receives blows from their hands and from clods of earth and from sticks and weapons, he comprehends thus: ‘ This body is such that blows from hands affect it and blows from clods of earth affect it and blows from sticks affect it and blows from weapons affect it. But this was said by the Lord in the Parable of the Saw: “If, monks, low-down thieves should carve you limb from limb with a two-handled saw, whoever sets his heart at enmity, he, for this reason, is not a doer of my teaching.” Unsluggish energy shall come to be stirred up by me, unmuddled mindfulness set up, the body tranquillised, impassible, the mind composed and one-pointed. Now, willingly, let blows from hands affect this body, let blows from clods of earth... from sticks... from weapons affect it, for this teaching of the Awakened Ones is being done.’... “
   
   The monk who follows the Buddha’s teaching realizes without having to think about it that pain is vipåka conditioned by kamma. He can accept any kind of vipåka with evenmindedness. 
   So long as we confuse nåma and rúpa we are full of the idea of self, of “my mind” and “my body”. When we begin to be mindful of one reality at a time we are on the way to right understanding of nåma and rúpa. At the first stage of vipassanå ñåùa nåma and rúpa are clearly distinguished from each other and only then their nature of non-self can be realized. But after this first stage paññå has to be developed further so that the subsequent stages can arise and the characteristics of impermanence, dukkha and anattå will be penetrated more clearly. As insight develops there will be more detachment from nåma and rúpa and eventually enlightenment can be attained. 
   
   
   *******
Chapter 4
   
   Misconceptions
   
   We have a distorted view of reality: what is impermanent we take for permanent, what is dukkha we take for happiness, what is non-self we take for self, what is foul we take for beautiful. Without the Buddha’s teachings we would never know that we have a distorted view of reality, that we deviate from the truth. We have accumulated these ways of wrong conceiving for so long, that even when we study the Dhamma we are still inclined to deviate from the truth. These ways of conceiving phenomena in the wrong way are classified in the scriptures as “vipallåsa”, as perversions or hallucinations. This was one of the subjects we discussed during our journey. 
   We read in “The Path of Discrimination” (Paìisambhidåmagga, First Division, VIII, Treatise on Perversions) :
   
   Bhikkhus, there are these four perversions of perception (saññå), perversions of cognizance (citta), perversions of view (diììhi). What four? Bhikkhus, seeing what is impermanent as permanent is a perversion of perception, a perversion of cognizance, a perversion of view. Seeing the painful (dukkha) as pleasant is a perversion of perception, a perversion of cognizance, a perversion of view. Seeing what is not self as self is a perversion of perception, a perversion of cognizance, a perversion of view. Seeing the foul as beautiful is a perversion of perception, a perversion of cognizance, a perversion of view. These, bhikkhus, are the four perversions of perception, perversions of cognizanze, perversions of view.
   
   We read further on that there are four non-perversions which are the opposites of the perversions. The perversions are deeply rooted and all of them arise so long as we have not attained enlightenment.
   Four of the eight akusala cittas rooted in lobha, attachment, are accompanied by diììhi. When there is diììhi one clings with wrong view to the self, to what one believes is permanent, to what one takes for beauty and for happiness. Citta is the “leader” in cognizing an object, and the accompanying cetasikas also experience that object, but they have each their own function. Citta and the accompanying cetasikas condition one another. When citta is accompanied by diììhi, the citta and the other cetasikas, saññå included, are conditioned by diììhi: all of them are perverted by wrong view. Saññå 8 which accompanies each citta has the function of remembering or recognizing. Saññå which accompanies kusala citta is completely different from saññå which accompanies akusala citta. Also in the case of akusala citta without diììhi, saññå which is perverted remembers wrongly, in a distorted way, and citta which is perverted cognizes the object in a distorted way. 
   The commentary to the “Path of Discrimination”, the “Saddhammappakåsiní”, explains that the perversions of saññå, citta and diììhi have different strengths: 
   
   “... The perversion of saññå is the weakest in strength of all three. The perversion of citta has more strength than the perversion of saññå. The perversion of diììhi has the greatest strength of all three.”
   
   This reminds us of the danger of wrong view. So long as we cling to the concept of self there cannot be the eradication of any defilement. 
   We have learnt from the Buddha’s teachings that what we call a person are ever changing phenomena which arise and fall away, but instead of developing right understanding of nåma and rúpa we are often absorbed in concepts and we remember these with perverted saññå. Since we have accumulated wrong saññå for countless lives we are inclined to think of ourselves and others as persons who exist, at least during a life time; we fail to see that a person is only citta, cetasika and rúpa which do not last. This causes us many problems when we suffer from the loss of people who are dear to us through death. We have learnt through the teachings that all dhammas are anattå, but we forget that realities are beyond control, that they do not belong to us. Even when we develop vipassanå we can be lured by the wrong view of self : we believe that “we” can cause the arising of sati. We take what is dukkha for happiness, we cling to life, to all the sense objects we experience. Whatever we experience through the six doors falls away immediately, it is dukkha, but we believe that what we experience can bring us pleasant feeling. Pleasant feeling does not last, it is dukkha. What is foul or ugly we take for beautiful: we find our body beautiful and forget that in reality it is foul. It consists of rúpa elements which arise and fall away immediately; it is insignificant and not worth clinging to. 
   The Buddha taught the way to overcome the perversions, but they can only be eliminated very gradually. Insight has to be developed stage by stage until enlightenment can be attained. The characteristics of nåma and rúpa should be known as they are when they appear one at a time. At the first stage of insight nåma is clearly distinguished from rúpa. We cannot forego this stage, because so long as we are confused about the difference between nåma and rúpa, higher stages of insight cannot be reached, the impermanence of realities cannot be realized and the concept of self cannot be eradicated. There may be awareness of particular rúpas but not of the nåma which experiences them. Then we are bound to take the experience for self. Or we may be merely thinking about nåma and rúpa and be forgetful to be aware of thinking. In that case we may take thinking for self. 
   We read in the “Dispeller of Delusion”, the commentary to the “Book of Analysis”, to the second Book of the Abhidhamma (Ch 7, Classification of the Foundations of Mindfulness) about reasons why the Buddha taught the four Applications of Mindfulness, namely of the body, of feeling, of citta and of dhammas. One of the reasons is as follows:
   
   Or alternatively, it is in order to abandon the perversions (vipallåsa) of the beautiful, the pleasant, the permanent and self. For the body is foul, and herein beings are perverted (into regarding it as beautiful) by the perversion of the beautiful. The first foundation of mindfulness is stated in order to abandon that perversion by showing them the foulness therein. And as regards feeling and so on 9, taken as “pleasant, permanent, self” feeling is dukkha, citta is impermanent and dhammas are non-self. And beings are perverted as to these by the perversions of the pleasant, the permanent and self. The remaining three (Applications of Mindfulness) are stated in order to abandon those perversions by seeing dukkha etc. 10 therein. Thus, they should alternatively be understood to be stated as four, no less, no more, in order to abandon the perversions of the beautiful, the pleasant, the permanent and self.
   
   The Buddha taught the “Application of Mindfulness of the Body” because we all cling to the body. We are so used to taking care of the body, to beautifing it or to adorning it, that we are ignorant of our clinging. When we read in the section on Mindfulness of the Body about the “Repulsiveness of the Body” we can be reminded that what we take for “our beautiful body” are only rúpa elements which are not beautiful, impermanent and do not belong to a self. We should not select one Application of Mindfulness in order to abandon a specific perversion. Any nåma or rúpa which appears can be object of understanding. If there is mindfulness only of rúpas of the body, but not of nåma, we shall not know rúpa as different from nåma and right understanding cannot develop. Citta is impermanent, it arises and falls away each moment. When seeing arises and then hearing, seeing has fallen away, because there cannot be seeing and hearing at the same time; each citta can experience only one object at a time. This can remind us of the impermanence of citta, but when it is said that the contemplation of citta can help one to abandon the perversion of permanence, it does not mean that mindfulness of rúpa, feeling or dhamma are excluded. Only through mindfulness of whatever reality appears, can the first stage of insight be reached, when nåma is realized as nåma and rúpa as rúpa. It is only at a higher stage of insight that the impermanence of realities can be penetrated. 
   We read in Khun Santi’s lexicon about the abandoning of the perversions:
   
   “The Buddha taught the four Applications of Mindfulness as a means to abandon the four perversions, but one should not fix one’s attention on a specific perversion with the purpose to abandon it, because everybody who is not an ariyan is bound to have the four perversions. When satipaììhana arises there can be awareness of a reality as anattå. Right understanding which results from listening to the Dhamma is accumulated and forms together with the other sobhana cetasikas included in saòkhårakkhandha (the khandha of formations) the condition for the arising of right mindfulness. At that moment there will be mindfulness of anyone of the four ‘Applications of Mindfulness’. Right understanding of realities which arises will gradually abandon the perversions until they are completely eradicated when the ‘path-consciousness’ (magga-citta) arises 11 .”
   
   Right understanding resulting from listening is accumulated together with all the other good qualities, the sobhana cetasikas included in saòkhårakkhandha (which khandha includes all cetasikas except feeling and saññå). In this way the right conditions are developed for right mindfulness which is aware of the nåma or rúpa which appears. Not only right understanding but all good qualities, such as mettå, generosity or patience are necessary to eliminate the clinging to the self. 
   We read in the “Path of Discrimination”, in the section on the perversions, about the eradication of the perversions. The sotåpanna (streamwinner) who has attained the first stage of enlightenment, has not eradicated all the perversions. He has eradicated the perversion of saññå, citta and diììhi which take what is impermanent for permanent. He has eradicated the perversion of diììhi which sees what is dukkha as happiness, but the perversions of citta and saññå which see dukkha as happiness he has not eradicated. He has eradicated the perversions of saññå, citta and diììhi which take what is non-self as self. He has eradicated the perversion of diììhi which sees the foul as beautiful, but the perversions of citta and saññå which see the foul as beautiful he has not eradicated.  
   The sotåpanna has eradicated wrong view, he does not take realities for permanent or for self. He has realized that realities which arise have to fall away, that they are impermanent. What arises and falls away has no beauty, but, although he has realized the impermanence of realities, the clinging to what is beautiful has been deeply accumulated, he cannot abandon it yet. He sees beauty in what is foul, and thus, he has to continue to develop right understanding of citta, cetasika and rúpa, so that the perversion of seeing beauty in what is not beautiful is eradicated. This perversion has become attenuated at the second stage of enlightenment, the stage of the once-returner, sakadågåmí, but it can only be completely eradicated at the third stage of enlightenment, the stage of the non-returner, anågåmí. We read in the “Visuddhimagga” (XXII) that the perversions of saññå and citta finding beauty in the foul are eradicated at the third stage of enlightenment, the stage of the non-returner or anågåmí. He does not cling to sense objects anymore, and thus he does not see the body as beautiful. But he still clings to rebirth which he considers as happiness instead of seeing it as dukkha. The “Visuddhimagga” states that the arahat has eradicated the perversions of saññå and citta finding happiness in what is dukkha. Only the arahat does not cling to rebirth, he has no inclination to consider it as happiness. Thus we see that it is extremely difficult to eradicate the perversions. 
   Defilements are deeply rooted and it is necessary to persevere in the development of understanding of the nåma or rúpa which appears now. The object of right understanding is the nåma and rúpa which appear in daily life, but as paññå develops, it understands more deeply their true nature. We have to follow the right Path so that realities will be understood as they are: impermanent, dukkha and not self. However, because of our defilements we are likely to deviate from the right Path, and then we shall not reach the goal. We are bound to forget that there is no one who develops right understanding.       
   We read in Khun Santi’s lexicon, under “practice”, about the practice of vipassanå:
   
    “This is the moment when sati together with sampajaññå (paññå) arises and is aware of the characteristic of nåma or rúpa. Then the truth is known that they are only nåma dhamma and rúpa dhamma, no being, no person, no self, no thing. Moreover, it is known that there is no person who practises, but that only sati sampajaññå (sati and paññå) and the accompanying sobhana (wholesome) dhammas each perform their own function with regard to the practice. If there is right understanding of the nature of anattå of realities it will be the condition for the right practice and eventually for detachment from the clinging to the idea of self.”
   
   If we forget that sati is anattå it conditions wrong practice. There are three factors which can obstruct or slow down the development of vipassanå namely: craving, taùhå, wrong view, diììhi and conceit, måna. Even when we listen to the Dhamma a great deal these three obstructions are bound to arise and slow down the practice. 
   There are many forms and varieties of thinking of ourselves. We may think of ourselves with clinging accompanied by wrong view, diììhi, or without wrong view, or with clinging accompanied by conceit. There are eight akusala cittas rooted in attachment, lobha-múla-cittas, of which four are accompanied by diììhi and four are without diììhi. When lobha-múla-citta is accompanied by conceit, it is not accompanied by diììhi. Thus, when we think of ourselves it may be with either one of the three factors which slow down the development of insight, namely, craving, wrong view and conceit. 
   We read in the “Middle Length Sayings” (I,”Discourse on Expunging”) that Mahå Cunda asked the Buddha a question about wrong views and that the Buddha gave him explanations. The text states:
   
   “Those various types of views, Lord, that arise in the world and are connected with theories of the self or with theories of the world, does there come to be ejection of these views, does there come to be renunciation of these views for a monk who wisely reflects from the beginning?”
   “Those various types of views, Cunda, that arise in the world and are connected with theories of the self or with theories of the world- wherever these views arise and wherever they obsess (the mind) and wherever they are current, it is by seeing them with perfect wisdom as they really are, thus: ‘This is not mine, this am I not, this is not my self,’ that there is ejection of these views, that there is renunciation of these views....”
   
   We read in the Commentary to this sutta, the “Papañcasúdaní”, that to think, “this is mine” (etaó mama), is to be in the grip of craving (taùhå); to think, “I am this” (eso aham asmi), is to be in the grip of conceit (måna); to think, “this is myself” (eso me attå), is to be in the grip of wrong view. 
   
   Thus we see that we may think of ourselves in many ways, not only with wrong view, but also with craving or conceit. Time and again the scriptures refer with the above quoted phrase to these three wrong ways of thinking 12. We have deeply accumulated these tendencies and if we are ignorant of them they will prevent us from becoming freed from the cycle of birth and death. 
   The “Book of Analysis” (Ch 17, “Analysis of Small Items”, in the Exposition of the Occurrences of Craving) gives an exposition of the different ways of craving in connection with “oneself”. One thinks, for example, “I am”, “I am such an one”, “I am also”, “I am otherwise”. 
   We read about these different ways of conceiving: 
   
   .... one gets the wish, “I am”; one gets the conceit, “I am”; one gets the wrong view, “I am”; when this happens there are these obsessions, “I am such an one” or “I am also” or “I am otherwise”.
   And how is there, “I am such an one? “I am a ruler” or “I am a Brahmin” or “I am a merchant” or “I am an artisan” or “I am a householder” or “I am an ascetic”....
   
   The Commentary to the “Book of Analysis”, the “Dispeller of Delusion” (under Behaviour of Craving) explains that there comes to be the thought “I am” depending on this internal pentad of khandhas (the five khandhas), due to taking it as a unit through craving, conceit and wrong view...
   
   The Commentary explains that if one takes the five khandhas as a unit and thinks “such am I”, this may be done without comparison or with comparison. We read in the Commentary:
   
   Herein, as to without comparison there comes to be the thought: “Such am I” by making only one’s own state the object without reference to any other aspect; among Khattiyas 13 and the like there comes to be the thought through craving, conceit and wrong view thus: “I am of this kind” is the meaning. This in the first place is the taking of it without comparison.
   But the taking of it by comparison is of two kinds, as the same and as not the same.... 
   
   All these ways of thinking occur time and again in our daily life. We may think of ourselves as being of such nationality, of having such status in society, of having had such education, with craving, conceit or wrong view: “I am such”. As we just read in the Commentary, even when we do not compare ourselves with someone else, but only think, “I am such, I am of this kind”, we may still have conceit, because we cling to the importance of our personality. We may cling to ourselves as belonging to a special group, a group of Dhamma students: “I am such”. When we compare ourselves with someone else we may see ourselves as being equal, higher or lower: “I am also”, or “I am otherwise”. The Book of “Analysis” gives the examples: “As he is a ruler (Khattya), so also am I a ruler”... or “As he is a ruler, I am not a ruler in the same way”. We may compare ourselves with others who have sati more often or who lack sati. Comparing is useless because sati is a type of nåma which arises because of its appropriate conditions. 
   The “Book of Analysis” points out that one may also think of oneself with regard to the future: “I shall be”. One may also think: “I am eternal”, and that is the wrong view of eternalism, or “I am not eternal”, and that is, as explained here, the wrong view of annihilism: one believes to be annihilated, that there is no rebirth.    
   We should not try to pinpoint all these different moments, because they can only be known through the development of satipaììhåna. So long as the difference between nåma and rúpa has not been realized by the insight knowledge of the first stage, it is not possible to clearly understand the different defilements which are anattå, which arise because of conditions. Defilements are nåma, but so long as we take nåma and rúpa as a unit, as a “whole”, it cannot be clearly understood what nåma is. However, studying details and considering them in daily life is useful, because we can be reminded of the many different ways of clinging to “our personality”, of thinking of ourselves. We may be inclined to think ,“He loses his temper, I am different”, or “His memory is weak, I am different” or “He practises vipassanå in the wrong way, I am different”. Instead of criticizing someone else we can see the urgency to develop the way leading to the eradication of the clinging to ourselves. 
   We may, without noticing it, cling to ourselves as a person who has sati: “I am such”, “I am the same”, “I am otherwise”. Or we conceive ourselves as a person who should reach the goal very soon, and then we shall certainly not reach it. Such ways of thinking can be a condition to engage in wrong practice and that is a form of diììhi. We may hope for the arising of sati, we may wait for insight knowledge, vipassanå ñåùa, or after someone has reached the first stage of vipassanå ñåùa he may wait for the next ones. After a moment of sati one may cling to it and feel happy about it. One may be so keen to have sati that one clings to characteristics of paramattha dhammas which appear. For example, hardness appears and then one may cling to this characteristic and erroneously believe that that is awareness of hardness. If we cling to “my practice”, to a self who develops satipaììhåna, we are on the wrong Path. There is no self who practises, only citta and cetasikas performing their functions. The conceiving of self is bound to be an obstruction time and again and only paññå which realizes such moments can be the condition to return to the right Path. We should not forget that right understanding should lead to detachment, but paññå must be very keen to realize even the more subtle kinds of akusala as not self. Måna can also obstruct the development of vipassanå. One may find oneself important and believe that one’s knowledge is already accomplished, that further study and consideration of realities is no longer necessary, or that one does not need to listen to someone else who explains the right Path. 
   The sotåpanna who has eradicated wrong view still thinks of himself with clinging or conceit. At the subsequent stages of enlightenment clinging and conceit are attenuated, but only at the last stage, the stage of the arahat, all ways of misconceivings, even the most subtle, are eradicated. This can show us that there should be awareness and right understanding of all kinds of realities, including all ways of misconceiving, of thinking of ourselves, so that their true nature can be penetrated. 
   **********    
      
   
   
          
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
1 The Påli term paììhåna means foundation. Satipaììhåna is the foundation of mindfulness. 
2 Mindfulness of the body, including all rúpas, mindfulness of feeling, mindfulness of citta and mindfulness of dhammas, including all dhammas which are not classified under body, feeling or citta. Thus, all objects of mindfulness are included in these four Applications of Mindfulness.  
3 The first stage is knowledge of the difference between nåma and rúpa; the second stage is knowledge of the conditions for nåma and rúpa; at the third stage paññå realizes the succession of nåma and rúpa as they arise and fall away very rapidly. At the fourth stage paññå realizes more clearly the arising and falling away of nåma and rúpa, one at a time.  
4 including adverting-consciousness and receiving-consciousness, arising wthin a sense-door process of cittas. 
5 Saka means one’s own. Kammassakata means: kamma which is one’s own. 
6 Rúpas can be conditioned by four factors: by kamma, citta, temperature and nutrition. Rúpas such as the sense-organs are conditioned by kamma. 
7 These will be explained in Ch 6.
8 Saññå is usually translated as perception. 
9 Namely citta and dhamma.
10 dukkha, impermanence and non-self. 
11 At the different stages of enlightenment the perversions are subsequently eradicated.
12 The commentary refers to them as the “papañca”, which is translated as “diffuseness” or aberrations. 
13 The Khattiyas belonged to the warrior caste, the highest social rank. Kings belonged to this caste. 
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

 

