   Chapter 5
   
   Purity of Síla
   
   The Påli term síla can mean: nature, character, habit or behaviour. Síla can be kusala or akusala. In the scriptures síla which is kusala, virtue or morality, has been classified in different ways. Síla is expressed by deeds through body and speech. We may like to listen to the Dhamma and develop satipaììhåna,  but our behaviour through body and speech is not always in conformity with the Dhamma. Therefore, it is important to learn more about the different aspects of síla. During our journey Khun Sujin stressed that for the understanding of the different subjects of the Dhamma we should always return to the paramattha dhammas which arise in our life: citta, cetasika and rúpa. In reference to síla we should consider whether it is nåma or rúpa. Síla is nåma, it is citta and cetasika.  Síla is not only abstention from evil, it is also the performance of wholesomeness through body and speech, such as helping others or paying respect to those who deserve respect. Also those who do not know the Dhamma can abstain from evil and perform wholesome deeds, they can have kusala síla. However, if one has never heard the Dhamma one does not know in detail what akusala and what kusala is. The Buddha taught in detail about the citta which motivates speech and deeds, about the development of kusala and the way to eradicate even the most subtle kinds of akusala. If one does not develop satipaììhåna there is still an idea of self who observes síla, and then síla cannot become purified. Because of knowledge of the Dhamma we have the means to know the different cittas which arise and which can motivate deeds through body and speech, and to develop the way leading to the eradication of the clinging to the self and all defilements. 
   We read in the “Path of Discrimination” (Treatise on Knowledge, Ch II, Virtue, 44, 45) :
   
   What is virtue? There is virtue as volition (cetanå), virtue as cetasika, virtue as restraint, virtue as non-transgression.
   How many kinds of virtue are there? There are three kinds of virtue (habit), profitable (kusala) síla, unprofitable (akusala) síla, indeterminate síla (avyåkata, neither kusala nor akusala).
   From what does virtue originate? Kusala síla originates from kusala citta, akusala síla originates from akusala citta, indeterminate síla originates from indeterminate citta.
   With how many dhammas does síla combine?
   Síla combines with restraint, síla combines with non-transgression, síla combines with the volition arising with restraint or non-transgression.
   In the case of killing living beings... of taking what is not given... of sexual misconduct... of false speech... of malicious speech... of harsh speech... of gossip... of covetousness... of ill willl... in the case of wrong view, virtue is in the sense of restraint, virtue is in the sense of its non-transgression....
   
   Abstention from akusala kamma is síla. The term kamma is generally used for good deeds or bad deeds, but kamma is actually cetanå cetasika, volition or intention, which arises with each citta. Akusala cetanå and kusala cetanå can motivate deeds which are capable to produce their appropriate results in the form of rebirth-consciousness or vipåkacittas which experience pleasant or unpleasant objects through the senses. During our discussions someone was wondering whether each akusala cetanå accompanying akusala citta produces result. When we like delicious food or enjoy ourselves watching a play there is lobha-múla-citta, citta rooted in attachment. He was wondering whether the akusala cetanå accompaying the akusala citta could bring a result in the form of experiencing unpleasant sense objects. Khun Sujin explained that there are different degrees of akusala. Akusala cetanå can produce result when it has the intensity of a completed course of action, akusala kamma patha. If every akusala cetanå would be akusala kamma patha, then a baby lying on its back would already commit bad deeds which produce unpleasant results. Why would the Buddha teach about akusala kamma patha if there were no difference of intensity between akusala citta and akusala kamma? When we merely enjoy ourselves and do not harm someone else there is lobha-múla-citta but not akusala kamma which can produce a result. However, the lobha-múla-citta is accumulated and conditions the arising of lobha again, later on. After seeing or hearing lobha-múla-citta arises very often, all day long, but we may not notice this. When we have no intention to harm someone else it is not akusala kamma patha. As we read in the quotation above from the “Path of Discrimination”, abstaining from the ten akusala kamma patha such as killing and the other akusala kamma patha, is síla. For each kind of akusala kamma specific constituent factors make it into a completed course of action, kamma patha. For example, in the case of killing there has to be a living being, one has to be conscious of the fact that it is a living being, there must be the akusala citta which intends to kill, the act of killing and the death which follows 1. A completed course of action can produce result by way of an unhappy rebirth or the experience of unpleasant objects through the senses. 
   Síla is abstention from evil as well as observing of what is wholesome. With regard to abstention from evil, three cetasikas, which are called virati cetasikas, perform the function of abstention: abstinence from wrong speech (vaci-duccarita virati), abstinence from wrong action (kåya-duccarita virati) and abstinence from wrong livelihood (åjíva-duccarita virati). Wrong livelihood is wrong speech or wrong action pertaining to our livelihood. It is impossible to abstain from akusala when virati cetasika does not arise. The three factors of the eightfold Path which are the síla of the eightfold Path are these three virati cetasikas, which are the right speech, right action and right livelihood of the eightfold Path. They arise one at a time, because when there is opportunity for abstinence from wrong speech there is not at the same time abstinence from wrong action. When enlightenment is attained all three abstinences accompany the lokuttara cittas which experience nibbåna. They fulfill their functions as path-factors in cutting off the base of misconduct, according to the stage of enlightenment which is attained 2. The classification about the origination of síla reminds us that the citta is the source of restraint from evil and of the performing of what is wholesome. There is no self who observes síla. As to indeterminate (avyåkata) síla, this is the síla of the arahat, who has, instead of kusala citta, kiriyacitta (inoperative citta). He does not perform kamma which can produce rebirth, because he has reached the end of the cycle of birth and death.
   The “Visuddhimagga” has classified wholesome síla, virtue or moral conduct, in many ways. There is síla for bhikkhus, for bhikkhunís (nuns), for novices and for laypeople. Laypeople can observe five precepts: they can train themselves to abstain from killing, stealing, lying, sexual misconduct and the taking of intoxicants. Only those who have attained the first stage of enlightenment, the stage of the sotåpanna (streamwinner) have no conditions to transgress these precepts. Laypeople can also observe eight precepts. In addition to the five precepts there are three more including abstaining from eating after midday, from using high and soft beds, from using perfumes or adornments. Novices have to observe ten precepts. 
   The “Visuddhimagga”, in the Chapter on Virtue, Síla, gives the following fourfold classification of purity of síla (pårisuddhi síla): 
    
   the restraint of “Påìimokkha” including 227 rules of discipline for
                                                                                           the monk,
   the restraint of the sense faculties (indriya saóvara síla),
   the purity of livelihood (åjíva pårisuddhi síla),
   the use of the four requisites of robe, dwelling, food and 
   medicines, that is purified by reflection (paccaya sannissita síla).
   
   With regard to the restraint of the Påìimokkha, we read in the “Book of Analysis” (Ch 12, 244):
   
   Herein a bhikkhu dwells restrained and controlled by the Påìimokkha restraint, endowed with (proper) behaviour and a (suitable) alms resort, seeing peril in (his) slightest faults, observing (the precepts) he trains himself in the precepts....  
   
   As regards restraint of the sense faculties, there are different levels of restraint. We read in the “Middle Length Sayings” (no. 27, Lesser Discourse on the Simile of the Elephant’s Footprint) that the Buddha spoke to the brahman Jåùussoùi about the monk who has restraint as to the sense-faculties:
   
   ... Having seen visible object with the eye he is not entranced by the general appearance, he is not entranced by the detail. If he dwells with this organ of sight uncontrolled, covetousness and dejection, evil unskilled states of mind, might predominate. So he fares along controlling it; he guards the organ of sight, he comes to control over the organ of sight....
   
   The same is said with regard to the other senses and the mind-door. When awareness arises of visible object, sound or the other sense objects, there is no opportunity for the arising of akusala citta. At such a moment one does not harm anybody else through body or speech. When we understand which paramattha dhamma síla is, namely, citta and cetasika, it will be clear that there can be síla, even when one does not act or speak. Satipaììhåna is the Buddha’s teaching, and thus, satipaììhåna should not be separated from the other ways of síla the monk should observe: the restraint of the “Påìimokkha”, the purity of livelihood and the use of the requisites which is purified by reflection. As to the monk’s livelihood, he should not try to obtain the requisites by hinting, by scheming or hypocrisy. As to purification of the use of the requisites by wise reflection, he should not have attachment to them but see them as a means to protect his body and to continue his life as a monk, developing paññå which leads to arahatship. We read in the “Visuddhimagga” (I, 124) about the “reviewing” of the requisites by the monk: 
   
   Herein, reviewing is of two kinds: at the time of receiving requisites and at the time of using them. For use is blameless in one who at the time of receiving robes, etc., reviews them either as (mere) elements or as repulsive, and puts them aside for later use, and in one who reviews them thus at the time of using them.
   
   Both the monk and the layfollower should train themselves in purity of síla, but the monk’s síla is higher than the síla of the layfollower, they cannot be compared with each other. Khun Sujin remarked that they are as different from each other as heaven and earth. The monk has left the household life with all its amenities in order to train himself to become an arahat, a perfected one. His lifestyle is like the arahat’s. Thus, the monk must have purity of síla, and if he commits a transgression he should make amends for it. If the transgression is very serious, such as killing, he is no longer a monk and he will be expelled from the order. However, also layfollowers can, in their own situation, apply what is laid down as the fourfold purification of síla. The restraint of the senses is achieved by satipaììhåna, and this can be developed by both monks and layfollowers. As regards purity of livelihood, also layfollowers should not be engaged in wrong livelihood, for example by bribery or deceit. As regards using the “requisites” wisely, this can also be applied by layfollowers. When one considers food as a medicine for the body it will help one not to indulge in overeating. It is natural that we are attached to clothing, food and home, but sometimes there can be conditions for kusala citta with wise reflection.   
   We read in the “Gradual Sayings” (”Book of the Tens”, Ch V, § 8, Conditions) that the Buddha said:
   
   Monks, these ten conditions must again and again be contemplated by one who has gone forth (from the home). What ten?
   He must again and again contemplate this fact: I am now come to a state of being an outcast. And this: My very life is dependent on others. And this: I must now behave myself differently. And this: Does the self 3 upbraid me for (lapse from) virtue, or does it not? And this: Do my discerning fellows in the Brahma-life, after testing me, upbraid me for (lapse from) virtue, or do they not? And this: In all things dear and delightful to me there is change and separation. And this: I myself am responsible for my deed, I am the heir to my deed, the womb of my deed, the kinsman of my deed, I am he to whom my deed comes home. Whatever deed I shall do, be it good or bad, of that shall I be the heir. The nights and days flit by for me- who have grown to what? And this: In my void dwelling do I take delight or not? And this: Have I come by any superhuman experience, any excellence of truly ariyan knowledge and insight, whereon when questioned in my latter days 4 by my fellows in the Brahma-life I shall not be confounded?
   These, monks, are the ten conditions to be again and again contemplated by one who has gone forth (from the home).
   
   We read in the Commentary, the “Manorathapúraùí”, as to the monk’s life being dependent on others, that this is because of his receiving of the four requisites. His livelihood should be pure and his conduct should be composed, different from laypeople. We read: “The monk who applies himself to the fourfold purity has developed vipassanå. He can reach arahatship”. Vipassanå is the condition for the fourfold purity, satipaììhåna should not be separated from the Vinaya.  The purpose of síla should not be pleasant results, such as rebirth in heaven, or honour, it should be the eradication of defilements. When someone applies himself to síla without the development of satipaììhåna there is an idea of self who does so, his síla is not pure. Moreover, his síla will not be steadfast; when he is in difficult circumstances he may not be able to observe síla. The sotåpanna who has eradicated through satipaììhåna the wrong view of self is steadfast in síla, he cannot transgress the five precepts, he cannot commit akusala kamma which produces an unhappy rebirth.
   When we understand which paramattha dhamma síla is, citta and cetasika, it will be clear that the citta with mettå, loving kindness, is síla. For the practice of mettå there should be awareness of the citta. When we develop mettå in daily life, we have goodwill towards our fellowmen, we do not harm them, and that is kusala síla. Once, when someone behaved in an unpleasant way and I said to Khun Sujin, “She does not like us”, Khun Sujin answered, “It does not matter, we like her,” and that is the practice of mettå. We can apply this in any situation when people dislike us. What about our own citta? We are often too slow in our reactions to help others, but when satipaììhåna arises there are conditions to move quickly in helping. During our journey one of the buses broke down and there was no seat left for us except in front near the driver. We had to sit near the foodboxes which broke so that bananas went all over the place and were crushed. Khun Sujin thought that we were unconfortable in the midst of all the commotion and she offered her seat; this was an example of helping without hesitation. This was an example reminding us that when there is an opportunity for kusala we should not wait, but perform it immediately. 
   It is difficult to practice síla in every situation. When we have to endure unpleasant behaviour from others it is a test for our patience and endurance. We cannot choose the objects which appear through the six doors, sometimes they are pleasant, sometimes unpleasant. We may be disturbed by someone else, but a “person” is only an object of thinking. In reality there are only nåma and rúpa appearing one at a time. If there can be awareness when we are in difficult situations we can gradually learn that there is not this or that situation which seems to last, but only seeing which experiences visible object, hearing which experiences sound or thinking which thinks of concepts which are not real. Realities arise because of their own conditions, they are beyond control and do not belong to a self. When there is awareness of one object at a time we attach less importance to certain situations. Only one object at a time through one doorway is experienced and it falls away immediately, it does not last. The six doors can be separated, not by “self”, but by paññå.   
   Some people believe that one should first develop síla, then samatha and after that vipassanå. When we read in the scriptures or the “Visuddhimagga” about the tripartite division of síla, samådhi (one-pointedness or concentration) and wisdom, misunderstandings may arise. However, when we read about this subject we should carefully consider all the different degrees of síla, samådhi and paññå which are implied. This division is not a rigid classification, but it is a systematic description of all levels of síla, samådhi and paññå. We read, for example, in the beginning of the “Visuddhimagga” (Ch I, 1), the following quotation from the “Kindred Sayings”(I, the Tangle):
   
   When a wise man, established well in Virtue,
   Develops Consciousness 5 and Understanding,
   Then as a bhikkhu ardent and sagacious
   He succeeds in disentangling this tangle. 
   
   “Tangle” is used here in the sense of the “network” of craving. Craving is like a network of branches which are entangled. The “Visuddhimagga” describes first síla, then the development of concentration and after that the development of right understanding. However, we should note that under síla he describes not only síla through bodily action and speech, but also síla which is purity of citta, síla which includes samatha and vipassanå. In Ch I, 19, the “Visuddhimagga” quotes the “Path of Discrimination”, where we read about all the different levels of síla. Included in síla are the subduing of the defilements which are the “hindrances”, the development of concentration and the different stages of jhåna, and also the stages of insight. We read, for example, about the stages of vipassanå:
   
   Through contemplation of impermanence in the case of perception of permanence...  Through contemplation of dukkha in the case of perception of pleasure... through contemplation of not-self in the case of perception of self... through contemplation of dispassion in the case of delighting...virtue is in the sense of its restraint, virtue is in the sense of its non-transgression. 
   
   Dispassion is the result of vipassanå ñåùa. We read further on that included in síla are also the four stages of enlightenment up to arahatship when all defilements are eradicated and there are no conditions for their arising again.
   If someone believes that he, as a layman, should first keep the five precepts and that he then can develop samatha and after that vipassanå, he overlooks the fact that there is no self who can regulate this. The Buddha taught satipaììhåna so that the wrong view of self can be eradicated. Through satipaììhåna right understanding is developed and without satipaììhåna síla cannot become “well established”. For the sotåpanna who has developed vipassanå, síla is “well established”. Through satipaììhåna there can be training in “higher síla” (adhi-síla sikkhå), “higher citta” (adhi-citta sikkhå) and “higher wisdom” (adhi-paññå sikkhå). As to higher citta or concentration, this includes all levels of concentration, not merely jhåna. Concentration, samådhi, is the cetasika which is one-pointedness, ekaggatå cetasika. It arises with each citta and has the function of focussing the citta on one object. When satipaììhåna arises, ekkagatå cetasika “concentrates” for that short moment on the nåma or rúpa which appears so that understanding of that reality can develop. In the development of samatha concentration is developed to a high degree so that jhåna can be attained, but this cannot be achieved without paññå which has right understanding of the citta and cetasikas which develop calm. In the “Visuddhimagga” all levels of concentration, jhåna included, are described, but this does not mean that everybody must develop jhåna in order to attain enlightenment 6. 
   Instead of thinking of classifications and names or thinking of a specific order as to the development of síla, concentration and paññå, we can gradually develop understanding of the nåma and rúpa which appear and then there is training in higher síla, higher citta and higher paññå. Even when attachment arises there can be mindfulness of it and at that moment one does not harm anyone; that is síla. Or we may be inclined to engage in wrong speech, such as slandering or useless speech, but if sati arises and it is aware of nåma or rúpa, there are conditions to abstain from akusala. We speak many times in a day, but do we know whether our speech is kusala or akusala? We need to know the nature of citta so that there can be training in higher síla. 
   We are inclined to observe síla with an idea of self who has síla. When satipaììhåna is being developed síla can become free from the wrong view of self. Then there will be purity of síla, “síla visuddhi” 7. We read in Khun Santi’s lexicon about síla visuddhi:
   
   “Purity of síla is síla which has reached a high degree of purity. When satipaììhåna arises and there is awareness and understanding of the true nature of a characteristic of nåma or rúpa which is appearing, the doorways of the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and mind are guarded. At that moment there is no committing of evil through body or speech, because the six faculties are guarded by sati, (indriya saóvara  síla 8 ), there is restraint through the six doors. This is called purity of síla, síla visuddhi. It is purified and free from the wrong view of self because there is the understanding that there are only nåma or rúpa which are appearing.”
   
   Here we see again that for the development of síla satipaììhåna is essential. So long as one is full of the idea of self one may try to force oneself to restrain from akusala and observe síla, but this is impossible  when there are no conditions for citta and cetasika which observe síla. Nåma, not self, observes síla and satipaììhåna is the right condition for purity of síla. Someone who does not develop right understanding may have wholesome speech or help others, but there is still the idea of self who does so and there cannot be purity of síla. 
   Síla is one of the perfections the Bodhisatta fulfilled in order to attain Buddhahood. Síla is a perfection when its purpose is the eradication of defilements. Then it is a way of kusala leading out of the cycle of birth and death. So long as defilements have not been eradicated we have to continue in the cycle of birth and death, and this means dukkha. We read in Khun Santi’s lexicon about kusala which leads out of the cycle (vivaììa gåmini 9 kusala):
   
   “Kusala which leads out of the cycle means each kind of kusala which has the purpose of eradication of defilements. No matter one offers one ladle of rice gruel or one helping of boiled rice, if one sees the disadvantage of akusala and one will apply oneself to the development of kusala with right understanding in order to eradicate defilements, it is a perfection, it is right practice, namely, kusala which leads out of the cycle of birth and death.“
   
   We may want to observe síla because we cling to the idea of being a “good person”, of being esteemed by others, or because of other selfish motives, and in that case it is not the perfection of síla. The perfection of síla has detachment as its goal.  
   
   
   
   *********** 
   
      
Chapter 6
   
   Samatha and Vipassanå
   
   In Pokkhara we watched in the evening a performance of Nepali dances and afterwards we had a Dhamma discussion. We discussed the lobha, attachment, which arose while we were enjoying ourselves and laughing. We hear about the disadvantages of lobha, but there is no self who can eradicate it, only paññå. Khun Sujin remarked that it may be lobha which conditions our wish to eradicate defilements, but that the only way leading to its eradication is the development of paññå which knows the characteristic of lobha as non-self. The clinging to self is deeply accumulated and it is bound to arise even when one tries to develop paññå, when one wants to know the truth. Khun Sujin often reminded us that we should be truthful as to the realities which arise. We listen to the Dhamma and consider what we hear so that right understanding can grow and can begin to know characteristics of nåma and rúpa. When we watch a dancing performance, for example, there is sound of music, sound of people, sound of birds. Sound is just sound, its characteristic can be known when it appears through earsense. Thinking about the quality or the origin of the sound is another reality, different from hearing. Khun Sujin said that while we watch a performance we can see the amount of lobha we have, and that this is more useful than being ignorant of lobha. As paññå develops it can understand any kind of reality which arises, wherever we are and at any time. We should not try to be a different person, someone who has a great deal of kusala, before we develop satipaììhåna. We should not try to have purity of síla and purity of concentration before developing paññå. Someone remarked that “access concentration” (upacåra samådhi) arising shortly before jhåna, and absorption concentration (appana samådhi) arising with the jhåna-citta are the proximate cause of paññå. Khun Sujin answered that this is the case only for those who understand the development of satipaììhåna. The aim of the Dhamma is detachment through right understanding of realities. Someone who attains jhåna without right understanding of nåma and rúpa will not reach the goal, he will continue to take the jhånacitta for self.
   Before we can understand what it means that concentration, samådhi, is the proximate cause of paññå, we should know what samatha, tranquil meditation, is and what vipassanå, the development of insight is. They each have a different aim and a different way of development. But for both ways of development right understanding is indispensable. Some people believe that they can develop calm merely by sitting in a quiet place and concentrating on one object; they believe that if one just concentrates on something there will be calm. Or they want to concentrate with the desire to become relaxed. Then their efforts are motivated by lobha, and this is wrong concentration, micchå samådhi. As Khun Sujin often stressed, we have to return to the paramattha dhammas in order to know what calm is and what concentration is. We have to know their different functions and we have to know when they arise, otherwise we shall only have a vague knowledge about tranquil meditation. Calm and concentration are different  cetasikas, they arise because of the appropriate conditions and are non-self. There are two cetasikas which are calm: kåya passaddhi, calm of “body”, and citta passadhi, calm of citta. The word “body” stands here for the mental body, namely cetasikas. Calm of citta conditions calm of the citta it accompanies, and calm of body conditions calm of the accompanying cetasikas. The cetasikas which are “calm” accompany each sobhana (beautiful) citta. Whenever we perform dåna or observe síla these two cetasikas accompany the kusala citta, but we may not notice the characteristic of calm, because the kusala citta falls away very rapidly. Concentration or samådhi is ekaggatå cetasika, a cetasika arising with each citta. Its function is to cause citta to focus on one object. For example, when we see, hear or think ekaggatå cetasika causes citta to focus on the object. It accompanies kusala citta, akusala citta or citta which is neither kusala nor akusala. Thus, not any kind of concentration is kusala. 
   In samatha calm is developed by means of a  suitable meditation subject. The “Visuddhimagga” (in chapters IV-XII) describes forty meditation subjects which can be the means to develop calm. Not just any other meditation subject can be used to this aim. For the development of calm sati and paññå (sati sampajaññå) are indispensable. There must be right understanding of true calm, which is freedom from defilements. Paññå must be very keen to know when akusala citta arises and when kusala citta. This is very difficult because cittas arise and fall away very rapidly. We may easily take for kusala what is akusala, especially when akusala is very subtle. If there is the desire to cause the growth of calm and concentration, one will not reach the aim.  Among the meditation subjects are the recollection of the Buddha’s pre-eminent qualities, mettå, loving kindness, or mindfulness of breathing. We may, in daily life, recollect subjects such as the Buddha’s pre-eminent qualities or we may develop mettå. These subjects may condition some moments of calm with kusala citta, but that is not the development of tranquil meditation. In tranquil meditation paññå knows how calm can increase with a meditation subject, and as calm increases, also concentration grows. If one has accumulated  inclination and skill for the development of calm, one may attain jhåna, absorption concentration. However, paññå must be very keen and many conditions have to be fulfilled. There are different stages of jhåna, and at each subsequent stage there is a higher degree of calm. At the moments of jhånacitta there are no sense impressions and defilements are temporarily subdued, but they are not eradicated. There are stages of rúpa-jhåna, material jhåna, where the meditation subjects are still dependent on materiality, and there are stages of arúpa-jhåna, immaterial jhåna, where the meditation subject is no longer dependent on materiality. Arúpa-jhåna is more refined than rúpa-jhåna. One should acquire “mastery” (vasí), great skill in jhåna, if one wants to develop higher stages of jhåna. We read in the “Visuddhimagga” (IV, 131) that one should have “mastery” in adverting to the jhåna, in entering it, in determining its duration, in emerging from it and in reviewing it. Even before the Buddha’s time people developed tranquil meditation to the stages of rúpa-jhåna and arúpa-jhåna in order to temporarily subdue defilements, but these could not be eradicated. The Buddha found the Path leading to the complete eradication of defilements, and this is the development of satipaììhåna. The objects of satipaììhåna are paramattha dhammas, they are any nåma or rúpa which is appearing at the present moment; one does not select any special object. The aim of the development of satipaììhåna is eradication of clinging to the self and eventually of all defilements. 
   Some people wonder whether it is necessary first to develop samatha and after that vipassanå. The Buddha did not set any rules with regard to samatha as a requirement for the development of insight. Individual inclinations are different. It depends on one’s accumulated inclinations whether one applies oneself to tranquil meditation or not. Some people developed both samatha and vipassanå, but for the attainment of enlightenment they still had to develop right understanding of all nåmas and rúpas. They had to acquire the “masteries”, so that they at any time could enter jhåna or emerge from it, and after having emerged from jhåna they could be mindful of realities, including the jhånacitta and accompanying jhåna-factors which are cetasikas. Otherwise they would take the jhånacitta for self. If people had great skill in jhåna and could be aware of the jhånacitta, jhåna was a foundation for the development of insight. 
   Some people wonder why, in the “Satipaììhåna Sutta” (Middle Length Sayings I, no. 10) “Mindfulness of Breathing” is included under the section “Mindfulness of the Body”. Does this imply that it is necessary for the development of vipassanå to be mindful of breathing? It is an object of samatha and an object of vipassanå. As an object of samatha it is one of the most difficult meditation subjects. If one tries to concentrate on breath without right understanding of this subject there will be clinging instead of calm. Breath is a rúpa conditioned by citta, and it can appear where it touches the nose tip or the upperlip. Breath is very subtle and the “Visuddhimagga” explains (VIII, 211):
   
   ... But this mindfulness of breathing is difficult, difficult to develop, a field in which only the minds of Buddhas, “Silent  Buddhas”10  and Buddha’s sons are at home...   
   
   Buddha’s sons are disciples who were endowed with great wisdom and special qualities (mahå-purisas, or “great men”). Thus, mindfulness of breathing as a meditation subject of samatha is not suitable for everybody. 
   Khun Santi explains in his lexicon the difference between mindfulness of breathing as a subject of samatha and as an object of vipassanå. We read about mindfulness of breathing as an object of vipassanå:
   
   “The paramattha dhamma which is breath is the object. In the ‘Mahå-Satipaììhåna Sutta’ the subject of breath has been shown under the section of ‘Mindfulness of Body’, because it regards the body, it is a reality which is a condition for the body. We used to take breath as mine, to think that it is ‘I’ who is breathing. However, when satipaììhåna arises it knows the characteristic of what is appearing, the Element of Earth, the Element of Fire or the Element of Wind, which impinges on the body. They are the characteristics of softness, heat or motion, which may appear at the nose tip or upperlip, just any of those characteristics. We may begin to know, we may gradually understand that it is only a reality which has this or that characteristic, that it is a rúpa element which does not know an object. In this way the wrong understanding that it is me who is breathing or my breath can be eliminated. When sati arises one does not pay attention to the place where breath contacts, one only knows the reality which is appearing. Sati which accompanies right understanding arises because of the appropriate conditions, namely, listening until there is right understanding. There is no need for a special preparation, no need to fix one’s attention beforehand, and there should not be the desire that sati must arise. Sati only arises now and then. If there is right understanding, satipaììhåna will be aware of different objects appearing through the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and mind-door, until it can be aware of whatever object appears. Thus, one will not just fix one’s attention on breath which appears through the bodysense. Gradually the truth of anattå will be penetrated and there will be a clearer understanding of realities as they are, so that paññå can become more accomplished. Then the stages of insight knowledge can be reached and eventually the path-consciousness and fruition-consciousness will arise when enlightenment is attained. However, this takes a long time, not just one life. Paññå must be developed on and on by listening, considering and investigation, but we should not have any expectation of result. Expectation is clinging, tanhå, which together with conceit, måna, and wrong view, diììhi, are factors which slow down the development of paññå.”
   
   From this quotation we see that the method and aim of vipassanå is different from the method and aim of samatha. In vipassanå no preparation is needed, there is awareness of whatever reality appears, be it kusala, akusala, pleasant or unpleasant. From the beginning we should remember that there is no self who can do anything to have more awareness and understanding. We should not try to change our character and become a better person with the aim to develop right understanding. It is right understanding itself which has the function to eradicate akusala. 
   We should not try to be aware of breath, because it is very subtle. It is tangible object, conditioned by citta, but it is already very difficult to be aware of other kinds of tangible objects such as hardness of the different objects we touch, and therefore, why should we try to be aware of breath which is so subtle? 
   People in the Buddha’s time who were highly gifted, who could become arahats with special distinctive qualities (mahå-purisas), could develop mindfulness of breath as a subject of samatha and vipassanå. We read in the “Kindred Sayings” (V, Mahå-vagga, Book X, Kindred Sayings about In-breathing and Out-breathing, Ch I, § 8, The Lamp) that the Buddha, while he was at Såvatthí said to the monks: ”Monks, intent concentration on in-breathing and out-breathing, if cultivated and made much of, is of great fruit, of great profit.” He then explained how to be aware of breath and to attain calm by means of this meditation subject 11. The person who develops this subject can attain all stages of rúpa-jhåna and arúpa-jhåna, and also “extinction” (nirodha). This is temporary extinction of consciousness, which can only be attained by non-returners and arahats who have developed all stages of rúpa-jhåna and arúpa-jhåna. 
   The Commentary to this sutta , the “Såratthappakåsiní” explains about the benefits of “Mindfulness of Breath”. We read: 
   
   “The monk who needs to have superpowers which are of the ariyan, the four stages of rúpa-jhåna, the four stages of arúpa-jhåna and the attainment of “extinction”, must be interested in thorough concentration on the the subject of breath... “
   
   The commentary explains that when this subject has been developed in all ways, all these benefits will occur to the meditator. 
   All arahats have eradicated the defilements, but they have different abilities, different talents. Some had superpowers which are “worldly” (lokiya, not lokuttara) and lokuttara (supramundane) 12. Thus, we see that great  benefits of “Mindfulness of Breath” occur to very special persons, to arahats who are highly gifted and have distinctive qualities. In our time the teachings are declining and there are in the human world no more arahats. The sutta and the commentary which I mentioned can remind us that “Mindfulness of Breath” cannot be properly developed by ordinary people.
   In the Buddha’s time people who had accumulated great skill for jhåna developed samatha to the degree of jhåna, and also developed vipassanå, so that they could attain enlightenment. However, there were also many people who only developed vipassanå and then attained enlightenment. They are called people who developed “dry insight”, sukkha vipassanå. In the “Designation of Human Types” (Puggalapaññatti, the fourth Book of the Abhidhamma) individuals with different inclinations have been described. We read in the “Table of Contents” about the “Grouping of Human Types by One”, about “one who is emancipated at times (samayavimutto)” and “one who is emancipated not (only) at times (asamayavimutto)”. The Commentary, the “Pañcappakaraùatthakata” explains that “emancipated at times” applies to those who have attained to the three lower stages of enlightenment. They have not attained the full emancipation of arahatship.   The Commentary states that “emancipated not at times” (the opposite of “at times”) applies to arahats who are “sukkhavipassaka”, who only practised dry insight, and did not develop jhåna. We read in chapter I about those who are “emancipated not (only) at times”: ”Indeed, all persons who are ariyans (noble or elect) are so emancipated in matters of the higher emancipation.” One can become enlightened, even to the stage of the arahat without having developed jhåna.  
   We also read about someone who is of “perturbable nature” (kuppadhammo) and someone who is of “imperturbable nature” (akuppadhammo). The person of “perturbable nature” is not steadfast, he has dhammas which can decline. Among this group are those who have attained the different stages of jhåna, but who have no masteries (vasís). They can attain jhåna with difficulty, they cannot enter or emerge as they wish. Their skill in jhåna can decline. Those who are of “imperturbable nature” are anågåmís and arahats who have mastery in jhåna, and moreover, all ariyans are “imperturbable in matters of ariyan emancipation”. Thus, the ariyans of the four stages of enlightenment are included, no matter they have “mastery” in jhåna or not. The ariyan freedom cannot decline, the defilements which have been eradicated cannot return. This reminds us of what is really essential. 
   We read in the “Kindred Sayings” (III, Khandhå-vagga, Kindred Sayings on Elements, Middle Fifty, Ch 4, § 88, Assaji) about a monk who was too sick to develop Mindfulness of Breathing and attain jhåna. Khun Buth Sawong from Cambodia, who can recite many suttas by heart, drew our attention to this sutta which shows that it is not necessary to develop jhåna in order to be able to attain enlightenment. We read that when the Buddha was staying near Råjagaha, he visited the venerable Assaji who was sick. They had the following conversation:
   
   ... “Formerly, lord, I kept trying to calm down my sickness, but I am still much troubled by my breathing. I cannot win balance of mind. But though I cannot win balance of mind, I say to myself:- ‘Yet I do not fall away.’”
   “Those recluses and brahmins, Assaji, who deem balance of mind as all in all, they who reverence balance of mind,-when they cannot win that balance of mind, say to themselves: ‘May we not fall away!’
   Now as to this, what do you think, Assaji? Is body permanent or impermanent?”
   “Impermanent, lord.”
   “So it is with the other factors, and consciousness... 
   Wherefore he who sees this... knows:’... for life in these conditions there is no hereafter.’
   If one feels a pleasant feeling... a painful feeling... a neutral feeling, he knows it is impermanent, he knows it as not clung to, he knows it has no lure for him.
   If he feels a pleasant feeling... a painful feeling... a neutral feeling, he feels unattached. If he feels a feeling that his bodily powers have reached their end, he knows that he so feels. If he feels a feeling that life has reached its end, he knows that he so feels. He knows that when body breaks up, henceforth, when life has run its course, all that he has felt, all that had a lure for him will grow cold.”
   
   Through the development of right understanding of the five khandhas, that is, of all nåma and rúpa within and around ourselves,  enlightenment can be attained and eventually arahatship can be reached. There can be awareness of seeing, visible object, feeling or thinking right now, why should we strive to reach jhåna first? 
   Sammå-samådhi, right concentration is one of the factors of the eightfold Path. It performs its function of focussing on the nåma or rúpa which is the object of right understanding, sammå-diììhi. At the same time sammå-sati is mindful of that object, right thinking, sammå-sankappa, “touches” the object so that sammå-diììhi can understand it, and right effort, sammå-våyåma, is the effort or energy for right understanding. These five cetasikas among the eight factors perform their functions when right understanding is being developed. The three factors of right speech, sammå-våcå, right action, sammå-kammanta, and right livelihood, sammå-åjíva pertain to the síla of the eightfold Path. There is no self who can try to concentrate on nåma and rúpa, right concentration is ekkaggatå cetasika performing its function. We should remember that the factors of the eightfold Path are cetasika paramattha dhamma, non-self. 
   The “Visuddhimagga” (XI, 121) explains that one of the benefits of the development of concentration is serving as the proximate cause for insight. When one reads this one may believe that everybody should develop jhåna as a condition for insight, but, as we have seen, it depends on one’s accumulated inclination whether one will develop jhåna or not. Moreover, also when one does not develop jhåna, sammå-samådhi is the proximate cause of paññå, since it performs its function while it accompanies paññå. As right understanding develops sammå-samådhi develops as well, and when lokuttara citta arises at the moment of enlightenment, sammå-samådhi has the degree of appanå-samådhi, absorption concentration. Its strength can be compared with absorption concentration which accompanies the jhånacitta of the first stage of jhåna. However, its object is not a meditation subject of samatha, but it is nibbåna. It has this strength of concentration because of the right conditions, namely the development of vipassanå to the degree that enlightenment can be attained. Samådhi which accompanies jhånacitta in samatha is not the proximate cause of paññå of the eightfold Path. It is right concentration, but not right concentration of the eightfold Path. The aim of samatha is not seeing nåma and rúpa as impermanent, dukkha and non-self. We should consider what the goal is in our life: the understanding of this moment of seeing, hearing, thinking, visible object, sound or any other paramattha dhamma which appears now. 
   
   
   
   ********  
1 See the commentary to the “Discourse on Right Understanding” (Middle Length Sayings, no 9) the “Papañcasúdaní”.
2 Defilements are eradicated subsequently at the four stages of enlightenment. They are eradicated by the path-consciousness, maggacitta. The three virati cetasikas accompany the magga-citta and also the result of the magga-citta, the fruition-consciousness, phala-citta, which immediately succeeds the magga-citta. See for the abstinences which are lokuttara, Atthasåliní II, Part VIII, Ch 1, 219, 220.  
3 the citta.
4 At the time of dying, according to the Commentary.
5 Citta, which stands for concentration.
6 This will be further explained in chapter 6.
7 Suddhi means brightness, excellence, and the prefix vi has here an intensifying meaning. 
8 The five senses are classified as rúpas which are “indriyas”, leaders, they are leaders each in their own field. Citta is manindriya, mind-faculty, the leader in its own field: it cognizes an object. 
9 vaììa is cycle and vivaììa means out of the cycle. Gåmini means going, leading. 
10 Silent Buddhas or Pacceka Buddhas have found the Path all by themselves, but they do not have accumulated the wisdom to the extent that they can teach the Path to others.   
11 See the “Visuddhimagga” VIII, 145- 245, which gives a detailed explanation.
12 Abhiññå, including magical powers such as walking on water, divine ear, penetration of other people’s minds, divine eye, remembrance of former lives, eradication of all defilements. 
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

 

