Table of Contents
*****************

Introduction to the Abhidhamma
1 Introduction to the Abhidhamma
2 Ultimate Truth and Conventional Truth
3 Dhamma in Detail
4 Abhidhamma in the Sutta
5 Citta
6 Citta and Cetasikas
7 Kamma and result
8 Rootless Cittas
9 The Experience of Objects through different doorways
10 Life-continuum, bhavanga-citta
11 Feelings (part 1)
12 Feelings (part 2)
13 The four Great Elements
14 The Eight Inseparable Rūpas
15 The Sense organs
16 The Five Khandhas
17 The World
18 Death and Rebirth
19 Rebirth in different planes of existence (1)
20 Rebirth in different Planes of Existence (2)
21 Accumulated inclinations
22 Four Planes of Consciousness (part 1)
23 The Four Planes of Consciousness (part 2)
24 Latent Tendencies
25 The Seven Books of the Abhidhamma
26 Introduction
27 The Dhammasaṅganī, the first Book of the Abhidhamma
28 The Vibhaṅga, the Second Book of the Abhidhamma
29 The Dhātu-Kathā, the Third Book
30 Puggalapaññatti, the fourth Book
31 Kathāvatthu, the Fifth Book
32 Yamaka, the Sixth Book of the Abhidhamma
33 The Paṭṭhāna, the seventh book of the Abhidhamma
34 Conclusion


by Nina van Gorkom

   Updated 12/4/11

   This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License. To view a copy of this
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/ or send a
letter to Creative Commons, 171 Second Street, Suite 300, San
Francisco, California, 94105, USA.

   $Id: iabh.texi,v 1.2 2011/04/12 07:43:20 alan Exp alan $

Introduction to the Abhidhamma
******************************

1 Introduction to the Abhidhamma
********************************

The Buddha taught conventional truth, sammutti sacca, and ultimate
truth, paramattha sacca. The Commentary to the “Middle Length
Sayings”, sutta 5, “No Blemishes”, states:

     “There is a twofold teaching of the Buddha, the Blessed One: the
     teaching in the conventional way and the teaching by way of
     ultimate realities. There is a human, a being, a woman, a man, a
     man of the warrior caste, a brahman, a god, and Mara. Such is the
     teaching in the conventional way. Impermanence, dukkha, anattā,
     the aggregates, elements, sensefields (āyatana),
     satipaṭṭhāna. Such is the teaching by way of ultimate
     realities. Here the Blessed One taught to those in the
     conventional way who by means of it, after having heard the
     teaching , penetrated the meaning and abandoned ignorance, and
     were skilled to attain distinction. But who by means of ultimate
     realities, after having heard the teaching, penetrated the meaning
     and abandoned ignorance, and were skilled to attain distinction,
     to those he taught by way of ultimate realities.”

   In the Suttanta we find the teaching in conventional way, but also
the teaching by way of ultimate realities. When the Buddha spoke in the
suttas about situations and people, he pointed to the truth of
impermanence, dukkha and anattā. He knew the dispositions of different
beings and which kind of teaching was most suitable for them. The
teaching of the Abhidhamma is mainly by way of ultimate realities,
paramattha dhammas. In order to have understanding of the Abhidhamma it
is essential to know the difference between ultimate realities,
paramattha dhammas, and concepts, paññatti, such as a person or a
tree.

2 Ultimate Truth and Conventional Truth
***************************************

Through the Buddhist teachings we learn that what we take for
“self”, for “our mind” and for “our body”, consists of
changing phenomena. That part of the Buddhist teachings which is the
“Abhidhamma” enumerates and classifies all phenomena of our life:
mental phenomena or nāma and physical phenomena or rūpa. Seeing is
nāma, it experiences visible object through the eye-door. Visible
object or colour is rūpa, it does not experience anything. The
eyesense, that functions as the eye-door through which visible object
is experienced, is also rūpa. The rūpas that are sense objects,
namely, visible object, sound, smell, flavour and tangible object, and
also the rūpas that are the sense organs of eyes, ears, nose, tongue
and bodysense, are conditions for the nāmas to experience objects.
Nāma and rūpa are interrelated. Nāma and rūpa are ultimate
realities. We should know the difference between ultimate truth,
paramattha sacca, and conventional truth, sammutti sacca. Ultimate
truth is not abstract. Ultimate realities, in Pāli: paramattha
dhammas, have each their own characteristic which cannot be changed. We
may change the name, but the characteristic remains the same. Seeing is
an ultimate reality, it experiences visible object which appears
through the eyes; it is real for everyone, it has its own unalterable
characteristic. Anger has its own characteristic, it is real for
everyone, no matter how we name it. Ultimate realities can be directly
experienced when they appear through eyes, ears, nose, tongue,
bodysense or mind. They arise because of their appropriate conditions.
Conventional truth is the world of concepts such as person, tree or
animal. Before we learnt about Buddhism, conventional truth, the world
of concepts, was the only truth we knew. It is useful to examine the
meaning of concept, in Pāli: paññatti. The word concept can stand
for the name or term that conveys an idea and it can also stand for the
idea itself conveyed by a term. Thus, the name “tree” is a concept,
and also the idea we form up of “tree” is a concept. We can think
of concepts, but they are not realities that can be directly
experienced, without having to name them.

3 Dhamma in Detail
******************

In all three parts of the Tipiṭaka we are taught about “dhamma”,
about everything which is real. Seeing is a dhamma, it is real. Colour
is a dhamma, it is real. Feeling is a dhamma, it is real. Our
defilements are dhammas, they are realities. When the Buddha attained
enlightenment he clearly knew all dhammas as they really are. He taught
us the “Dhamma", the teaching on realities, in order that we also may
know dhammas as they are. Without the Buddha's teaching we would be
ignorant of reality. We are inclined to take for permanent what is
impermanent, for pleasant what is sorrowful and unsatisfactory
(dukkha), and for “self” what is non-self. The aim of all three
parts of the Tipiṭaka is to teach people the development of the way
leading to the end of defilements. In the Suttanta, the
“Discourses”, the Dhamma is explained to different people at
different places on various occasions. The Buddha taught about all
realities appearing through the “six doors” of eyes, ears, nose,
tongue, bodysense and mind. He taught about cause and effect and about
the practice leading to the end of all sorrow. As regards the
Abhidhamma, this is an exposition of all realities in detail. The
prefix “abhi” is used in the sense of “preponderance” or
“distinction”. “Abhidhamma” means “higher Dhamma” or
“Dhamma in detail”. The form of this part of the Tipiṭaka is
different, but the aim is the same: the eradication of wrong view and
eventually of all defilements. Thus, when we study the many
enumerations of realities, we should not forget the real purpose of our
study. The intellectual understanding of realities (pariyatti) should
encourage us to the practice (paṭipatti) which is necessary for the
realization of the truth (paṭivedha). While we are studying the
different mental phenomena (nāmas) and physical phenomena (rūpas) and
while we are pondering over them, we can be reminded to be aware of the
nāma and rūpa which appear at that moment. In this way we will
discover more and more that the Abhidhamma explains everything which is
real, that is, the “worlds” appearing through the six doors of the
senses and the mind.

4 Abhidhamma in the Sutta
*************************

In the Anguttara Nikāya, Book of the Ones (Ch VIII, § 4) we read
about right understanding as being the most precious in life - that
which doesn't bring sorrow:

     “Of slight account, monks, is the loss of such things as
     relatives. Miserable indeed among losses is the loss of wisdom. Of
     slight account, monks, is the increase of such things as
     relatives. Chief of all the increases is that of wisdom... Of
     slight account, monks, is the loss of such things as wealth.
     Miserable indeed among losses is the loss of wisdom. Of slight
     account, monks, is the increase of such things as wealth. Chief of
     all the increases is that of wisdom... “Of slight account,
     monks, is the loss of such things as reputation. Miserable indeed
     among losses is the loss of wisdom. Of slight account, monks, is
     the increase of such things as reputation. Chief of all the
     increases is that of wisdom. Wherefore I say, monks, you should
     train yourselves thus: We will increase in wisdom. You must train
     yourselves to win that.”

   This sutta is an exhortation to develop right understanding of
realities. Understanding of realities is the most precious in life, as
the above-quoted sutta states. Sutta reading is not easy and we have to
carefully consider each word of the sutta. We have to know what kind of
understanding is meant in this sutta. The Buddha pointed to the
development of understanding of all realities in daily life, no matter
he taught Sutta or Abhidhamma. The Abhidhamma helps us to understand
the deep meaning of the suttas. We may be inclined to overlook the
implications of the meaning of understanding, when we read that
understanding is the most precious of all. We have to know what kind of
understanding, understanding of which objects. Also in the suttas the
Buddha teaches to develop right understanding of ultimate realities,
but in the suttas the Buddha mostly speaks about people’s situations
in daily life, about their clinging to pleasant objects, and the sorrow
caused by clinging. He spoke in conventional terms in order to help
people to understand what is true in the ultimate sense. Whatever
reality arises does so because of the proper conditions. The
conditioned realities of our life are citta, consciousness, cetasika,
mental factors arising with the citta and rūpa, physical phenomena.
These are three conditioned paramattha dhammas. There is no person, no
self who sees, clings, feels sadness; there are only nāma, mental
phenomena, and physical phenomena, rūpa. In the above-quoted sutta we
are reminded that right understanding is more precious than people we
hold dear or possessions. It is the understanding that whatever occurs
in life, be it pleasant or unpleasant, are only conditioned dhammas.
When we suffer the loss of dear people we should remember that also
sadness is a conditioned dhamma, a cetasika, mental factor, arising
with akusala citta. It only lasts for one moment, it falls away and
then there is a next moment of consciousness. At the moment of seeing
there is no sadness at the same time; seeing experiences a different
object: visible object. Each citta only experiences one object at a
time. Through the Abhidhamma we are reminded all the time that there is
no person who clings, no person who suffers, that only citta and the
accompanying cetasikas experience different objects, be these
unpleasant or pleasant. There is no person who develops understanding;
understanding, paññā, is a cetasika that can only arise when there
are the appropriate conditions for it. The Abhidhamma is not a theory
one finds in a textbook; the teaching of the Abhidhamma is about all
the realities that appear at this moment. The Abhidhamma teaches about
seeing, about thinking of what was seen, about all the defilements
arising on account of what is experienced through the senses and the
mind-door.

5 Citta
*******

The truth is different from what we always assumed. What we take for a
person are only nāmas, mental phenomena, and rūpas, physical
phenomena, that arise and fall away. Nāma and rūpa are real in the
ultimate sense, they are different from concepts such as person or
animal. Citta, consciousness, and cetasika, mental factor arising with
the citta, are both nāma. They experience different objects.
It is not a self or a person who experiences something, it is citta
that cognizes an object. Citta experiences only one object and then it
falls away to be succeeded by the next citta. We may have thought that
there is one consciousness that lasts, that can see, hear and think,
but this is not so. Only one citta arises at a time: at one moment a
citta that sees arises, at another moment a citta that hears arises.
Each citta lasts only for an extremely short time and then it falls
away. The five senses and the mind are the doorways through which citta
can cognize the different objects which present themselves. Each citta
experiences an object, in Pāli: ārammaṇa. Knowing or experiencing
an object does not necessarily mean thinking about it. The citta which
sees has what is visible as object; it is different from the cittas
which arise afterwards, such as the cittas which know what it is that
was perceived and which think about it. The citta which hears
(hearing-consciousness) has sound as its object. Even when we are sound
asleep and not dreaming, citta experiences an object. There isn't any
citta without an object. There are many different types of citta which
can be classified in different ways. Some cittas are kusala
(wholesome), some are akusala (unwholesome). Kusala cittas and akusala
cittas are cittas which are cause; they can motivate wholesome or
unwholesome deeds through body, speech or mind which are able to bring
about their appropriate results. Some cittas are the result of
wholesome or unwholesome deeds, they are vipākacittas. Some cittas are
neither cause nor result; they are kiriyacittas (sometimes translated
as “inoperative"). Cittas can be classified by way of jāti (jāti
literally means “birth” or “nature”). There are four jātis:

   * kusala

   * akusala

   * vipāka

   * kiriya

   Both kusala vipāka (the result of a wholesome deed) and akusala
vipāka (the result of an unwholesome deed) are one jāti, the jāti of
vipāka. It is important to know which jāti a citta is. We cannot
develop wholesomeness in our life if we take akusala for kusala or if
we take akusala for vipāka. For instance, when someone speaks
unpleasant words to us, the moment of experiencing the sound
(hearing-consciousness) is akusala vipāka, the result of an
unwholesome deed we performed ourselves. The aversion which may arise
very shortly afterwards is not vipāka, but it arises with akusala
citta. Aversion or anger, dosa, can motivate unwholesome action or
speech. We can learn to distinguish these moments from each other by
realizing their different characteristics. When we have understood that
cittas both of ourselves and others arise because of conditions we
shall be less inclined to dwell for a long time on someone else’s
behaviour. In the ultimate sense there is no person to be blamed and no
person who receives unpleasant results. In reality there are only
citta, cetasika and rūpa that arise because of their own conditions.

6 Citta and Cetasikas
*********************

Citta does not arise singly, it is always accompanied by cetasikas,
mental factors. Only one citta arises at a time and each citta is
accompanied by several cetasikas. Citta is the leader in cognizing an
object and the accompanying cetasikas have each their own function
while they assist citta in cognizing an object. Citta may be of one of
the four jātis of kusala, akusala, vipāka or kiriya. Cetasikas are of
the same jāti as the citta they accompany. Some cetasikas, such as
feeling and remembrance or “perception” (saññā), accompany each
citta, others do not. Feeling, in Pāli: vedanā, is a cetasika which
arises with every citta. Citta only knows or experiences its object; it
does not feel. Feeling, vedanā, however, has the function of feeling.
Feeling is sometimes pleasant, sometimes unpleasant. When we do not
have a pleasant or an unpleasant feeling, there is still feeling: at
that moment the feeling is neutral or indifferent. Perception or
remembrance, in Pāli: saññā, marks the object so that it can be
recognized later on. Whenever we remember something it is saññā, not
self, which remembers. It is saññā which, for example, remembers
that this colour is red, that this is a house, or that this is the
sound of a bird. Contact, in Pāli: phassa, is another cetasika which
arises with every citta; it “contacts” the object so that citta can
experience it. There are also types of cetasika which do not arise with
every citta. Unwholesome mental factors, akusala cetasikas, accompany
only akusala cittas, whereas sobhana cetasikas, “beautiful” mental
factors, accompany kusala cittas. Among the cetasikas which can
accompany akusala cittas or kusala cittas, some are roots, hetus. A
root or hetu is the foundation of the akusala citta or kusala citta,
just as the roots are the foundation of a tree. They give a firm
support to the citta and cetasikas they arise together with. There are
three cetasikas which are unwholesome roots, akusala hetus: attachment
(lobha), aversion (dosa) and ignorance (moha). Akusala cittas may be
rooted in moha and lobha, or in moha and dosa, or they may have moha as
their only root. Moha arises with each akusala citta. Moha is
blindness, it does not know the danger of akusala; it is the root of
all evil. There are three sobhana hetus, beautiful roots:
non-attachment (alobha), non-aversion (adosa), and wisdom (paññā).
All kusala cittas are rooted in non-attachment and non-aversion, and
they may or may not be rooted in wisdom, paññā. There are many
shades and degrees of the akusala hetus and the sobhana hetus. Akusala
citta is impure and it leads to sorrow. At the moment of akusala citta
there is no confidence in wholesomeness; one does not see that akusala
citta is impure and harmful. For example, when we see a pleasant sight,
akusala cittas with attachment tend to arise. At such a moment there is
“unwise attention” to the object which is experienced; we are
enslaved to that object and do not see the danger of akusala. Thus we
go on accumulating more and more akusala. We may find it difficult to
see that even when we do not harm or hurt others, the citta can still
be akusala. For example, when we like nature, there is a degree of
attachment and attachment is not kusala, it is different from
unselfishness. We may see the danger of akusala which is coarse, but it
is difficult to see the danger of akusala which is more subtle. However
through the study of the Dhamma we can acquire more understanding of
akusala dhammas and then we may begin to see the danger of all degrees
of akusala. Whenever the citta is not intent on wholesomeness, we act,
speak or think with akusala citta. We may not have unkind thoughts or
thoughts of coarse desire, but the cittas which think can still be
akusala cittas; they are akusala cittas whenever we do not think
wholesome thoughts. We think time and again of people, of things which
have happened or will happen, and we should find out for ourselves when
thinking is kusala and when akusala. When the citta is kusala, there is
confidence in wholesomeness. Confidence, or faith, saddhā, is a
sobhana cetasika. Each kusala citta is assisted by many sobhana
cetasikas. When we see the value of kusala, there are conditions for
the arising of kusala citta. Kusala citta is pure and it is capable of
producing a pleasant result. Defilements and wholesome qualities are
cetasikas, they are non-self. They are not listed just to be read and
memorized, they are realities of daily life and they can be known as
they are by being mindful of them.

7 Kamma and result
******************

As we have seen, three cetasikas are unwholesome roots, akusala hetus:
attachment (lobha), aversion (dosa) and ignorance (moha). Three
cetasikas are beautiful roots, sobhana hetus: non-attachment,(alobha),
non-aversion, (adosa) and wisdom (paññā). Unwholesome roots, akusala
hetus, can motivate ill deeds through body, speech or mind. Ill deeds
are called in Pāli: akusala kamma. Kamma is the cetasika (mental
factor arising with the citta) which is intention or volition, in Pali:
cetanā. However, the word “kamma" is also used in a more general
sense for the deeds which are intended by cetanā. The term kamma-patha
(literally “course of action") is used as well in this sense. There
are akusala kamma-pathas and kusala kamma-pathas, ill deeds and good
deeds, accomplished through body, speech and mind. As regards akusala
kamma-patha, there are ten akusala kamma-pathas and these are
conditioned by lobha, dosa and moha. They are: killing, stealing,
sexual misbehaviour, lying, slandering, rude speech, frivolous talk,
covetousness, ill-will and wrong view (diṭṭhi). Beautiful roots,
sobhana hetus, motivate good deeds such as generosity, abstention from
ill deeds, mental development which includes samatha and vipassanā.
Whatever conduct we follow in daily life is conditioned by the
wholesome or unwholesome roots accumulated from life to life. There is
no self who can determine to do wrong or to do what is right, it is
conditioned by the roots and many other factors. Each moment, whatever
we do, is conditioned. When we are generous, helping others or paying
respect, we may believe that there are only kusala cittas. However,
what we take for wholesome may be motivated by akusala, such as conceit
or being intent on some advantage for ourselves. Kusala cittas and
akusala cittas alternate in our life. This shows how deeply rooted
defilements are. Kamma is a mental activity which can be accumulated.
Since cittas that arise and fall away succeed one another in an
unbroken series, the force of kamma is carried on from one moment of
citta to the next moment of citta, from one life to the next life. In
this way kamma is capable to produce its result later on. A good deed,
kusala kamma, can produce a pleasant result, and an evil deed can
produce an unpleasant result. Kamma produces result at the first moment
of life: it produces rebirth-consciousness in a happy plane of
existence such as the human plane or a heavenly plane, or in an unhappy
plane of existence such as a hell plane or the animal world. Throughout
our life kamma produces seeing, hearing and the other sense-impressions
that are vipākacittas, cittas that are results. Vipākacittas are
neither kusala cittas nor akusala cittas. Seeing a pleasant object is
the result of kusala kamma and seeing an unpleasant object is the
result of akusala kamma. If there is right understanding of the citta
that is cause and the citta that is result we shall know the meaning of
anattā. We shall come to understand that there is no self who can
cause the arising of pleasant or unpleasant experiences through the
senses. Due to kamma gain and loss, praise and blame alternate in our
life.

8 Rootless Cittas
*****************

Each citta experiences an object. There is not only one type of citta,
but there is a great diversity of cittas that experience objects. If we
want to know ourselves we should not merely know the moments of akusala
cittas or kusala cittas but other moments as well. Kusala cittas and
akusala cittas are cittas that are cause, they can motivate good or
evil deeds, and these deeds can produce their appropriate results later
on. Kusala cittas and akusala cittas are accompanied by cetasikas that
are roots, hetus. As we have seen, three of these hetus are akusala;
they are: lobha (attachment), dosa (aversion) and moha (ignorance).
Three hetus are sobhana (beautiful); they are: alobha (greedlessness or
generosity), adosa (non-hate or loving kindness) and amoha (paññā or
wisdom). The citta or cetasika which is accompanied by a hetu is
sahetuka (“sa” means “with”). For example, dosa-mūla-citta,
citta rooted in dosa, is sahetuka; moha and dosa are the hetus which
arise with dosa-mūla-citta. There are also cittas that are rootless,
ahetuka. There are many ahetuka cittas arising in a day. Seeing,
hearing, smelling, tasting and the experience of tangible object
through the bodysense are ahetuka vipākacittas. Nobody can cause the
arising of seeing, hearing or the other sense-cognitions; they are the
results of kamma, a deed performed in the past. An evil deed produces
akusala vipākacitta and a good deed produces kusala vipākacitta.
Seeing that is akusala vipākacitta experiences an unpleasant object
and seeing that is kusala vipākacitta experiences a pleasant object.
Of each of the five sense-cognitions (seeing, etc.) there are two kinds
experiencing an object through one of the five sense-doors: one is
ahetuka akusala vipāka and one is ahetuka kusala vipāka. Thus, there
are five pairs of ahetuka vipākacittas which arise depending on the
five sense-doors. These five pairs are called in Pali:
dvi-pañca-viññāṇa (two times five viññāṇa). When a pleasant
or an unpleasant object impinges on the eyesense, seeing-consciousness
only experiences what appears through the eyes, there is no like or
dislike yet of the object. Seeing-consciousness is an ahetuka
vipākacitta. Cittas which like or dislike the object arise later on;
these are sahetuka cittas (arising with hetus). Seeing is not the same
as thinking of what is seen. When one uses the word “seeing” one
usually means: paying attention to the shape and form of something and
knowing what it is, such as a person or a thing. However, there must
also be a kind of citta which merely sees visible object, and this
citta does not know anything else. What is seen we can call “visible
object” or “colour”; what is meant is: what appears through the
eyes. Whenever we see, hear, smell, taste or experience tangible object
through the bodysense, there are ahetuka vipākacittas before akusala
cittas or kusala cittas arise. The citta which dislikes the object may
arise afterwards. This citta is “sahetuka”, with hetus (roots); it
is akusala citta rooted in dosa, aversion, and it is accompanied by
unpleasant feeling. Or the citta which likes the object may arise; this
citta is also “sahetuka”, rooted in lobha, attachment, and it may
be accompanied by pleasant feeling or by indifferent feeling. We are
inclined to think that the “five pairs” (dvi-pañca-viññāṇa),
such as seeing or hearing, can occur at the same time as like or
dislike of the object, but this is not so. Different cittas arise at
different moments and the feelings which accompany the cittas are
different too; these realities arise each because of their own
conditions and they are non-self.

9 The Experience of Objects through different doorways
******************************************************

Seeing is an ahetuka vipākacitta that experiences visible object
through the eye-door. Hearing is an ahetuka vipākacitta that
experiences sound through the ear-door. Each of the sense-cognitions
experiences an object through the appropriate doorway. There is not
only one citta that experiences visible object, or one citta that
experiences sound, but each of the sense-cognitions arises in a series
or process of cittas succeeding one another and sharing the same
object. They all cognize the same object, but they each perform their
own function. Seeing is preceded by the eye-door
adverting-consciousness, which adverts to visible object. It does not
see but it merely turns towards the visible object that has just
impinged on the eyesense (1)This citta is an ahetuka kiriyacitta
(inoperative citta), it is not akusala citta, not kusala citta and not
vipākacitta. Seeing, which is an ahetuka vipākacitta, is succeeded by
two more ahetuka vipākacittas which do not see but still cognize
visible object that has not fallen away yet. They perform a function
different from seeing while they cognize visible object. Visible object
is rūpa and it lasts longer than citta. These cittas are
receiving-consciousness (sampaṭicchana-citta), that receives visible
object and investigating-consciousness (santīraṇa-citta), that
investigates the object. The investigating-consciousness is succeeded
by the determining-consciousness (votthapana-citta), which is an
ahetuka kiriyacitta. This citta is followed by seven javana-cittas that
are, in the case of non-arahats kusala cittas or akusala cittas. There
is a fixed order in the cittas arising within a process and nobody can
change this order. There is no self who can determine whether the
determining-consciousness will be succeeded by akusala cittas or kusala
cittas. Cittas arise and fall away succeeding one another extremely
rapidly and nobody can make kusala citta arise at will. Kusala
performed in the past is a condition for the arising of kusala at
present. When the sense-door process of cittas is finished, the sense
object experienced by those cittas has also fallen away. Very shortly
after the sense-door process is finished, a mind-door process of cittas
begins, which experience the sense object which has just fallen away.
Although it has fallen away, it can be object of cittas arising in a
mind-door process. The first citta of the mind-door process is the
mind-door adverting-consciousness (mano-dvārāvajjana-citta) which
adverts through the mind-door to the object which has just fallen away.
The mind-door adverting-consciousness is neither akusala citta nor
kusala citta; it is an ahetuka kiriyacitta. After the mind-door
adverting-consciousness has adverted to the object it is succeeded by
either kusala cittas or akusala cittas (in the case of non-arahats),
which experience that same object. When visible object is experienced
through the mind-door the cittas only know visible object, they do not
pay attention to shape and form or think of a person or a thing. But
time and again there are also other mind-door processes of cittas which
think of people or things and then the object is a concept, not visible
object. The experience of visible object conditions the thinking of
concepts of people and things which arises later on. All the time sense
objects impinge on the different doorways. They appear just for a
moment, and then they fall away. The Buddha pointed out the dangers of
being infatuated with the objects we experience through the six doors.
He taught people to develop the wisdom which knows the realities
experienced through the six doors as nāma and rūpa, phenomena which
are impermanent and non-self. What is impermanent is “dukkha”, it
cannot be happiness. When we come to know things as they are, we will
be less infatuated with objects.

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) The five-sense-door adverting-consciousness
(pañca-dvåråvajjana-citta) turns towards the object through one of
the five sense-doors. It is named after the relevant sense-door, such
as eye-door adverting-consciousness or ear-door adverting-consciousness.

10 Life-continuum, bhavanga-citta
*********************************

There are moments when there are no sense-impressions, when one does
not think, when there are no akusala cittas or kusala cittas. Even when
there are no sense-impressions and no thinking there must be citta;
otherwise there would be no life. The type of citta which arises and
falls away at those moments is called bhavanga-citta. Bhavanga
literally means “factor of life”; bhavanga is usually translated
into English as “life-continuum”. The bhavanga-citta keeps the
continuity in a lifespan, so that what we call a “being” goes on to
live from moment to moment. That is the function of the bhavanga-citta.
There are countless bhavanga-cittas arising at those moments when there
are no sense-impressions, no thinking, no akusala cittas or kusala
cittas. When we are asleep and dreaming akusala cittas and kusala
cittas arise, but even when we are in a dreamless sleep there still has
to be citta. There are bhavanga-cittas at such moments. Also when we
are awake countless bhavanga-cittas arise; they arise in between the
different processes of citta. It seems that hearing, for example, can
arise very shortly after seeing, but in reality there are different
processes of citta and in between these processes bhavanga-cittas
arise. When an object contacts one of the five senses the stream of
bhavanga-cittas is interrupted and a sense-cognition arises. However,
there cannot be a sense-cognition immediately. When sound, for example,
impinges on the earsense, there is not immediately hearing. There are
still some bhavanga-cittas arising and falling away before the
five-sense-door adverting-consciousness (pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta)
adverts to the sound through the ear-door and hearing arises. The
bhavanga-cittas do not perform the function of adverting to the sound
which contacts the earsense, they do not experience the sound. They
have their own function which is keeping the continuity in a lifespan.
In the “Atthasālinī”, the commentary to the first book of the
Abhidhamma, the Dhammasangaṅi, the parable of the Mango is given,
explaining a process of cittas after the stream of bhavanga has been
arrested. We read (Expositor, 271, part X, no 2, Discourse on the moral
result of the sensuous realm) that a man went to sleep under a
mango-tree. A ripe mango fell down, grazing his ear. Awakened by the
sound he looked, stretched out his hand, took the fruit, squeezed it,
smelt it and ate it. We read:

     “What does this simile signify? The function of the object
     striking the sentient organism. When this happens there is the
     function of adverting by the five doors just agitating the
     life-continuum, the function of just seeing by visual cognition,
     of just receiving the object by the resultant mind-element
     (receiving-consciousness], of just the examining of the object by
     the resultant element of mind-cognition
     (investigating-consciousness), the determining of the object by
     the inoperative element of mind-cognition (the kiriyacitta which
     is determining-consciousness). But verily only the apperception
     (the series of javana-cittas) enjoys the taste of the object.”

   Processes of cittas occur at this moment: seeing, attachment to what
is seen, thinking about it and taking it for a person or thing. It
seems that when there is seeing we think at the same time of a person
or thing, but each citta cognizes only one object at a time. It is
beneficial to learn about the different processes of cittas that
succeed one another extremely rapidly. When one has not studied the
Dhamma one confuses the different doorways and the different objects,
one “joins” them together. One is inclined to believe that there is
a self who coordinates all the different expriences. In reality there
are only different cittas arising because of their appropriate
conditions that experience different objects one at a time. When we
look at people they seem to last, and this is because we think for a
long time of shape and form of people and of things. There are many
different moments of thinking and these fall away. Thinking is a
paramattha dhamma, but the concepts that are the objects of thinking
are not paramattha dhammas. We can learn to discern when we are in the
world of concepts and when in the world of paramattha dhammas.

11 Feelings (part 1)
********************

We think of ourselves as having happy feeling or unhappy feeling. We
take feeling for something lasting and we take it for my feeling. In
reality feeling is a cetasika accompanying each and every citta. It
arises with the citta it accompanies and then it falls away
immediately. Feeling experiences the same object as the citta it
accompanies, but it is different from citta that is the leader in
cognizing an object. Feeling experiences the object in its own way, it
experiences the flavour of the object. There is no moment without
feeling. Feelings are manifold and they can be classified in different
ways. When there is not pleasant feeling or unpleasant feeling, there
is indifferent feeling. When mental feelings and bodily feelings are
taken into account, feelings can be classified as fivefold:

   * pleasant bodily feeling (sukha)

   * painful bodily feeling (dukkha)

   * happy feeling (somanassa)

   * unhappy feeling (domanassa)

   * indifferent feeling (upekkhā)

   Feeling is different as it accompanies cittas of the four jātis
(classes) of kusala, akusala, vipāka or kiriya. Somanassa, happy
feeling, can arise with cittas of all four jatis: with kusala citta,
akusala citta, vipākacitta and kiriyacitta. It is important to know of
which jāti feeling is, otherwise we are misled by our feelings. When
we have happy feeling, we may believe that this is kusala, but most of
the time it accompanies akuala citta rooted in lobha, attachment. When
somanassa accompanies lobha-mūla-citta (citta rooted in attachment),
somanassa is also akusala. There can be pleasant feeling when one likes
a pleasant visible object, a beautiful sound, a fragrant odour, a
delicious taste, a soft touch or an agreeable thought. When we enjoy
delicious food with pleasant feeling, that feeling is different from
pleasant feeling arising when we appreciate someone else’s kusala. In
the latter case it is more refined and calm. There are many sobhana
cetasikas accompanying kusala citta: calm, evenmindedness, confidence
in kusala, mindfulness. They all condition the pleasant feeling that is
kusala. Somanassa can accompany kusala citta, but it does not accompany
each kusala citta. When we perform dāna (generosity), observe sīla (
morality) or apply ourselves to mental development, there can be
somanassa or upekkhā, indifferent feeling, with the kusala citta. When
we give a present to someone else with pleasant feeling, we may think
that there is one kind of feeling which lasts, but in reality there are
different moments of feeling accompanying different cittas. There can
be a moment of pure generosity accompanied by pleasant feeling, but
many moments of attachment are bound to arise after the kusala cittas
have fallen away. We may be attached to the person we give to or to the
thing we give, or we may expect something in return; we want to be
liked by the person who receives our gift. Such moments of attachment
may be accompanied by somanassa. Somanassa which is kusala and
somanassa which accompanies lobha are different kinds of somanassa
arising closely one after the other, and it is difficult to distinguish
one from the other. It seems that there is one kind of somanassa and
that it lasts. In reality there are many different moments of somanassa.

12 Feelings (part 2)
********************

Domanassa, unhappy feeling, arises only with cittas of the jāti which
is akusala; it always arises with dosa-mūla-citta, citta rooted in
aversion, and it does not arise with lobha-mūla-citta, citta rooted in
attachment, nor with moha-mūla-citta, citta rooted in ignorance. When
we see someone else suffer, we have compassion and want to help him.
However, kusala cittas and akusala cittas arise closely one after the
other. We may be sad because of someone else’s suffering and then
akusala citta rooted in dosa, aversion, arises. This is accompanied by
unhappy feeling. At such a moment there is no compassion, but we may
not notice this.
Upekkhā, indifferent feeling, is different from somanassa and from
domanassa; it is neither happy nor unhappy. Upekkhā can arise with
cittas of all four jātis, but it does not arise with every citta.
Indifferent feeling can accompany lobha-mūla-citta.When we walk or
when we get hold of different things we use in our daily life, such as
a pen or a book, there is bound to be clinging even when we do not feel
particularly glad. We cling to life and we want to go on living and
receiving sense-impressions. Seeing, hearing, smelling and tasting
which are vipākacittas experiencing a pleasant or unpleasant object,
are always accompanied by indifferent feeling. Often it is not known
whether the object experienced by these cittas was pleasant or
unpleasant, they fall away immediately. When a pleasant or unpleasant
tangible object is experienced through the bodysense, the
body-consciousness, which is vipākacitta, is not accompanied by
indifferent feeling but by pleasant bodily feeling or by painful bodily
feeling. The impact of tangible object on the bodysense is more intense
than the impact of the other sense objects on the corresponding senses.
Pleasant bodily feeling and painful bodily feeling are nāma. We can
call them “bodily feeling” because they are conditioned by impact
on the bodysense. When, for example, temperature which is just the
right amount of heat or cold impinges on the bodysense the
body-consciousness which experiences it is accompanied by pleasant
bodiIy feeling. Body-consciousness is vipākacitta and in this case
kusala vipākacitta. When it experiences a pleasant object, it is the
result of kusala kamma, a wholesome deed, and when it experiences an
unpleasant object, it is the result of akusala kamma, an unwholesome
deed. We attach great importance to feeling, we let ourselves be
carried away by the feelings which arise on account of pleasant or
unpleasant objects we experience through the senses. The Buddha
classified feeling as a separate khandha because people cling very much
to feeling. We are enslaved to our feelings, but they are only
realities which arise because of the appropriate conditions and do not
last.

13 The four Great Elements
**************************

Rūpas, material phenomena, are not mere textbook terms, they are
realities that can be directly experienced. Rūpas do not know or
experience anything; they can be known by nāma. Rūpa arises and falls
away, but it does not fall away as quickly as nāma. When a
characteristic of rūpa such as hardness impinges on the bodysense it
can be experienced through the bodysense by several cittas arising in
succession within a process. But even though rūpa lasts longer than
citta, it falls away again, it is impermanent. Rūpas do not arise
singly, they arise in units or groups. What we take for our body is
composed of many groups or units, consisting each of different kinds of
rūpa, and the rūpas in such a group arise together and fall away
together. There are four kinds of rūpa, the four “Great Elements”
(Mahā-bhūta rūpas), which have to arise together with each and every
group of rūpas, no matter whether these are rūpas of the body or
rūpas outside the body. The types of rūpa other than the four Great
Elements depend on these four rūpas and cannot arise without them.
They are the following rūpas:

   * the Element of Earth (paṭhavīdhātu) or solidity

   * the Element of Water (āpodhātu) or cohesion

   * the Element of Fire (tejodhātu) or heat

   * the Element of Wind (vāyodhātu) or motion

   Earth, Water, Fire and Wind do not in this context have the same
meaning as in conventional language, neither do they represent
conceptual ideas as we find them in different philosophical systems. In
the Abhidhamma they represent ultimate realities, specific rūpas each
with their own characteristic. The element of earth, paṭhavī dhātu,
translated into English as “solidity” or “extension”, has the
characteristic of hardness or softness. It can be directly experienced
when we touch something hard or soft. We do not have to name this rūpa
“element of earth” in order to experience it. It is an element that
arises and falls away; it has no abiding substance, it is devoid of a
“self”. We take softness and hardness of the body for self, but
these are only elements arising because of conditions. It may seem that
hardness can last for some time, but in reality it falls away
immediately. The hardness that is experienced now is already different
from the hardness that arose a moment ago. The element of earth appears
as hardness or softness; the element of fire as heat or cold; the
element of wind as motion or pressure. These three elements can be
experienced by touch. The element of water cannot be experienced
through touch, but only through the mind-door. When we touch what we
call water, cold which is the element of fire, or hardness, which is
the element of earth, can be directly experienced. Every day we
experience a great variety of sense objects, but they are, in fact,
only different compositions of rūpa elements. When we touch a cushion
or chair, tangible object may appear, such as hardness or softness. We
used to think that a cushion or chair could be experienced through
touch. When we are more precise, it is hardness or softness that can be
experienced through touch. Because of remembrance of former experiences
we can think of a cushion or chair and we know that they are named
“cushion” or “chair”. This example can remind us that there is
a difference between ultimate realities and concepts we can think of
but which are not real in the ultimate sense. Viewing the body and the
things around us as different combinations of rūpas may be new to us.
Gradually we shall realize that rūpas are not abstract categories, but
that they are realities appearing in daily life.

14 The Eight Inseparable Rūpas
*******************************

Rūpas always arise in groups, and the four Great Elements of solidity,
cohesion, temperature and motion are always present wherever there is
materiality. Apart from these four elements there are other rūpas,
namely twentyfour “derived rūpas” (in Pāli: upādā rūpas). The
derived rūpas cannot arise without the four Great Elements, they are
dependent on them. Four among the derived rūpas always arise together
with the four Great Elements in every group of rūpas and are thus
present wherever materiality occurs, no matter whether rūpas of the
body or materiality outside the body. These four rūpas are the
following:

   * visible object (or colour)

   * odour

   * flavour

   * nutrition

   The four Great elements and these four derived rūpas, which always
arise together, are called the “inseparable rūpas” (in Pāli:
avinibbhoga rūpas). Wherever solidity arises, there also have to be
cohesion, temperature, motion, colour, odour, flavour and nutritive
essence. Visible object has as its proximate cause the four Great
Elements because it cannot arise without them. However, when a
characteristic of one of these four Great Elements, such as hardness or
heat, is experienced, the accompanying visible object cannot be
experienced at the same time. Only one rūpa at a time can be
experienced by citta. When there are conditions for seeing, visible
object is experienced. When we close our eyes, there may be remembrance
of the shape and form of a thing, but that is not the experience of
visible object. The thinking of a “thing”, no matter whether our
eyes are closed or open, is different from the actual experience of
what is visible. Odour cannot arise alone, it needs the four Great
Elements which arise together with it and it is also accompanied by the
other rūpas included in the eight inseparable rūpas. When odour
appears we tend to be carried away by like or dislike. We are attached
to fragrant odours and we loathe nasty smells. However, odour is only a
reality which is experienced through the nose and it does not last.
Flavour is another rūpa included in the eight inseparable rūpas. We
are attached to food and we find its flavour very important. As soon as
we have tasted delicious flavour, attachment tends to arise. We are
forgetful of the reality of flavour which is only a kind of rūpa. When
we recognize what kind of flavour we taste, we think about a concept,
but this thinking is conditioned by the experience of flavour through
the tongue. Nutrition is another kind of rūpa which has to arise with
every kind of materiality. It can be exerienced only through the
mind-door. Nutritive essence is not only present in rice and other
foods, it is also present in what we call a rock or sand. It is present
in any kind of materiality. Insects are able to digest what human
beings cannot digest, such as, for example, wood. If one does not
develop understanding of realities one will be enslaved by all objects
experienced through the senses. On account of these objects akusala
cittas tend to arise. If someone thinks that there is a self who can
own what is seen, touched or smelt, he may be inclined to commit
unwholesome deeds such as stealing. In reality all these objects are
insignificant, they arise and then fall away immediately. In the
ultimate sense life exists only in one moment, the present moment. At
the moment of seeing the world of visible object is experienced, at the
moment of hearing the world of sound, and at the moment of touching the
world of tangible object. Life is actually one moment of experiencing
an object.

15 The Sense organs
*******************

For the experience of objects through the senses there have to be sense
organs and these are rūpas. Visible object and also the rūpa which is
eyesense are conditions for seeing. Eyesense does not know anything
since it is rūpa, but it is a necessary condition for seeing. Eyesense
is a rūpa in the eye, capable of receiving visible object, so that
citta can experience it. For hearing, the experience of sound, there
has to be earsense, a rūpa in the ear, capable of receiving sound.
There must be smellingsense for the experience of odour, tastingsense
for the experience of flavour and bodysense for the experience of
tangible object. Through the bodysense are experienced: the earth
element, appearing as hardness or softness; the fire element, appearing
as heat or cold; the wind element, appearing as motion or pressure.
When these characteristics appear they can be directly experienced
wherever there is bodysense. The bodysense is all over the body, also
inside the body. Thus, there are five kinds of sense organs. These
sense organs can be the doorways for the cittas that experience sense
objects. As we have seen, visible object, sound, odour, flavour and
tangible object (which consists of three of the four Great Elements)
are experienced through the corresponding sense-doors and they can also
be experienced through the mind-door. Rūpas of the body and also
rūpas outside the body do not arise without there being conditions for
their arising. There are four factors that produce rūpas of the body:
kamma, citta, temperature (the element of heat) and nutrition. As we
have seen, kamma is actually the volition that motivates good and evil
deeds. Kamma that has been committed has fallen away, but since it is a
mental activity it is accumulated and can produce result later on.
Throughout our life kamma produces seeing, hearing and the other
sense-impressions that are vipākacittas, cittas that are results.
Rebirth-consciousness is the mental result of kamma, vipākacitta, but
at that moment kamma also produces rūpas and kamma keeps on producing
rūpas throughout life; when it stops producing rūpas our life-span
has to end. Kamma produces particular kinds of rūpas such as the sense
organs. Citta also produces rūpas. Our different moods become evident
by our facial expressions and then it is clear that citta produces
rūpas. Temperature, which is actually the element of heat, also
produces rūpas. Throughout life the element of heat produces rūpas.
Nutrition is another factor that produces rūpas. When food has been
taken by a living being it is assimilated into the body and then
nutrition can produce rūpas. Some of the groups of rūpas of our body
are produced by kamma, some by citta, some by temperature and some by
nutrition. The four factors which produce the rūpas of our body
support and consolidate each other and keep this shortlived body going.
If we see the intricate way in which different factors condition the
rūpas of our body we shall be less inclined to think that the body
belongs to a self. There are not only rūpas of the body, there are
also rūpas which are the material phenomena outside the body. What we
take for rocks, plants or houses are rūpas and these originate from
temperature. We may wonder whether there are no other factors apart
from the element of heat that contribute to the growth of plants, such
as soil, light and moisture. It is true that these factors are the
right conditions that have to be present so that a plant can grow. But
what we call soil, light and moisture are, when we are more precise,
different combinations of rūpas, none of which can arise without the
element of heat or temperature that produces them. Rūpas outside the
body are only produced by temperature, not by kamma, citta or nutrition.

16 The Five Khandhas
********************

All that is real can be classified as four ultimate realities,
paramattha dhammas: as citta, cetasika, rūpa and nibbāna. Citta,
cetasika and rūpa are conditioned realities that arise and fall away
and nibbāna is the unconditioned element that does not arise and fall
away. All conditioned realities that arise and fall away can be
classified as five khandhas, aggregates. The five khandhas are not
different from the three paramattha dhammas which are citta, cetasika
and rūpa. The five khandhas are:

   * Rūpakkhandha, all physical phenomena

   * Vedanākkhandha, feeling (vedanā)

   * Saññākkhandha, remembrance or “perception” (saññā)

   * Saṅkhārakkhandha, comprising fifty cetasikas (mental factors
     arising with the citta)

   * Viññāṇakkhandha, comprising all cittas

   As regards the fifty-two kinds of cetasika which may arise with
citta, they are classified as three khandhas: the cetasika which is
feeling (vedanā) is classified as one khandha; the cetasika which is
remembrance or “perception" (saññā) is classified as one khandha;
as regards the other fifty cetasikas, they are classified altogether as
one khandha, the khandha of formations, saṅkhārākkhandha. For
example, in saṅkhārakkhandha are included cetasikas such as volition
or intention (cetanā), attachment (lobha), aversion (dosa), ignorance
(moha), loving kindness (mettā), generosity (alobha) and wisdom
(paññā). All defilements and all good qualities are included in
saṅkhārākkhandha, they are impermanent not “self".
Saṅkhārākkhandha is sometimes translated as “activities” or
“mental formations”. As regards citta, all cittas are one khandha:
viññāṇakkhandha. Thus, one khandha is rūpakkhandha and the other
four khandhas are nāmakkhandhas. Three nāmakkhandhas are cetasika and
one nāmakkhandha is citta. Anything which is khandha does not last; as
soon as it has arisen it falls away again. Although khandhas arise and
fall away, they are real; we can experience them when they present
themselves. The khandhas arise and fall away all the time. When seeing
arises, there is viññāṇakkhandha, and there are the accompanying
cetasikas: vedanākkhandha, saññākhandha, saṅkhārakkhandha
(including cetasikas apart from feeling and saññā), and there is
eyesense which is rūpa-kkhandha. Thus, the khandhas are: citta,
cetasika and rūpa arising at this moment. We do not have to name them
in order to know them, they each have their own characteristic that can
be realised without naming. Thinking arises shortly after seeing has
fallen away, but we may be confused about different cittas and take
seeing and thinking together. Thus, it seems that we see immediately a
person or a tree, but these are concepts we think about, they are not
seen through the eyesense. Seeing sees only what is visible and it is
different from thinking. At the moment of thinking there are five
khandhas, but these are different from the khandhas that arose at the
moment of seeing. We may think of a person or tree with clinging and
wrong view. The citta that thinks is viññāṇakkhandha, and there
are the accompanying cetasikas: vedanākkhandha, saññākhandha and
saṅkhārakkhandha in which are now included clinging and wrong view.
Moreover there is a rūpa that is the physical base of thinking. Cittas
arise and fall away so rapidly that it is difficult to distinguish
different cittas from each other. It seems that there is one citta
performing different functions at the same time. We take seeing and
thinking for my seeing and thinking.   We read in the “Kindred
Sayings” (III, 140, translated by Ven. Bodhi) that the Buddha, while
he was dwelling at Ayojjhā, said to the monks:

     “Bhikkhus, suppose that this river Ganges was carrying along a
     great lump of foam. A man with good sight would inspect it, ponder
     it, and carefully investigate it, and it would appear to him to be
     void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in
     a lump of foam?   So too, bhikkhus, whatever kind of form there
     is, whether past, future or present, internal or external, gross
     or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near: a bhikkhu inspects
     it, ponders it, and carefully investigates it, and it would appear
     to him to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could
     there be in form?”

   The Buddha then goes on to make the same observation by way of
similes on the four nāmakkhandhas of feeling, perception, volitional
formations and conscious-ness. When we take the khandhas as a
“whole” of a person, we have wrong view of self. Thus, when we fail
to see the different characteristics of naama and ruupa when they
appear one at a time, we take them for a self or a person.

17 The World
************

The study of the different kinds of nāma and rūpa and the various
conditions for their arising will help us to understand that they are
anattā. Gradually we shall come to understand that all our experiences
in life, all the objects we experience, our bodily movements and our
speech are only conditioned nāma and rūpa. In the planes of existence
where there are nāma and rūpa, nāma conditions rūpa and rūpa
conditions nāma in different ways. The rūpas that are sense objects
and the rūpas that can function as sense-doors are conditions for the
different cittas arising in processes which experience sense objects.
The study of rūpas can help us to have more clarity about the fact
that only one object at a time can be experienced through one of the
six doors. Visible object, for example, can be experienced through the
eye-door, it cannot be experienced through the body-door, thus, through
touch. Seeing-consciousness experiences what is visible and
body-consciousness experiences tangible object, such as hardness or
softness. Through each door the appropriate object can be experienced
and the different doorways should not be confused with one another.
When we believe that we can see and touch a flower, we think of a
concept. A concept or conventional truth can be an object of thought,
but it is not a paramattha dhamma, an ultimate reality with its own
inalterable characteristic. When we are thinking about the world and
all people in it, we only know the world by way of conventional truth.
It seems that there is the world full of beings and things, but in
reality there is citta experiencing different dhammas arising and
falling away very rapidly. Only one object at a time can be cognized as
it appears through one doorway. Without the doorways of the senses and
the mind the world could not appear. So long as we take what appears as
a ‘whole’, a being or person, we do not know the world. We read in
the “Kindred Sayings” (IV, Saḷāyatana vagga, Kindred Sayings on
Sense, Second Fifty, Ch I, § 68, Samiddhi sutta) that when the Buddha
was staying near Rājagaha, in Bamboo Grove, Samiddhi came to see him
and adressed him:

     “ ‘The world! The world!’ is the saying, lord. Pray, lord,
     to what extent is there the world or the concept of
     ‘world’?” “Where there is eye, Samiddhi, visible object,
     seeing-consciousness, where there are dhammas cognizable by the
     eye, there is the world and the concept of ‘world’.” (The
     same is said with regard to the other doorways.) In our life happy
     moments and sad moments alternate. We attach great importance to
     our experiences in life, to our life in this world, but actually
     life is extremely short, lasting only as long as one moment of
     citta. We read in the “Visuddhimagga” (VI, 39) : “Life,
     person, pleasure, pain - just these alone Join in one conscious
     moment that flicks by. Ceased aggregates of those dead or alive
     Are all alike, gone never to return. No [world is] born if
     [consciousness is] not Produced; when that is present, then it
     lives; When consciousness dissolves, the world is dead: The
     highest sense this concept will allow (Nd.1,42).”


18 Death and Rebirth
********************

What is birth, and what is it actually that is born? We speak about the
birth of a child, but in fact, there are only nāma and rūpa which are
born. The word “birth” is a conventional term. We should consider
what birth really is. In order to understand what causes birth we
should know what conditions the nāma and rūpa which arise at the
first moment of a new lifespan. The citta which arises at that moment
is called the rebirth-consciousness or paṭisandhi-citta. Paṭisandhi
means relinking, it “links” the previous life to the present life.
It is usually translated as rebirth-consciousness, but, since there is
no person who is reborn, birth-consciousness would be more correct.
Since there isn't any citta which arises without conditions, the
paṭisandhi-citta must also have conditions. The paṭisandhi-citta is
the first citta of a new life and thus its cause can only be in the
past. One may have doubts about past lives, but how can people be so
different if there were no past lives? We can see that people are born
with different tendencies and talents. Cittas which arise and fall away
succeed one another and thus each citta conditions the next one. The
last citta of the previous life (dying-consciousness) is immediately
succeeded by the first citta of this life, without there being any
interval. That is why tendencies one had in the past can continue by
way of accumulation from one citta to the next one and from past lives
to the present life. Since people accumulated different tendencies in
past lives, they are born with different tendencies and inclinations.
Rebirth-consciousness is the result of kamma, it is vipākacitta. Our
life starts at the moment the paṭisandhi-citta arises together with
the rūpa which is at the same time produced by kamma. A lifespan ends
when the last citta, the dying-consciousness (cuti-citta) falls away.
Kamma produces rūpa not only at the first moment of life but
throughout our life. Kamma produces the vipākacittas which experience
pleasant and unpleasant objects through the sense-doors, and it also
produces throughout our life the rūpas which can function as the
sense-doors through which these objects are received. Some kammas
produce results in the same life in which they have been performed,
some produce result in the form of rebirth-consciousness of a future
life, or they produce result in the course of a future life. We have
performed deeds in past lives which could produce rebirth but which
have not yet come to fruition. We cannot know which kamma will produce
the next rebirth. If akusala kamma produces the rebirth of the next
life there will be an unhappy rebirth. In that case the cittas which
arise shortly before the dying-consciousness are akusala cittas and
they experience an unpleasant object. The paṭisandhi-citta of the
next life which succeeds the cuti-citta (the dying-consciousness),
experiences that same unpleasant object. If kusala kamma produces the
rebirth there will be a happy rebirth. In that case kusala cittas arise
shortly before the cuti-citta and they experience a pleasant object.
The paṭisandhi-citta of the next life experiences that same pleasant
object. The object experienced shortly before the dying-consciousness
may be a sign of kamma one performed, or a sign of one’s future
destiny, or it may be any object experienced through one of the senses.
The kamma that will produce the next rebirth conditions the last
javana-cittas arising before the cuti-citta to experience that object.
There is no self who transmigrates from one life to the next life;
there are only nāma and rūpa arising and falling away. The present
life is different from the past life but there is continuity in so far
as the present life is conditioned by the past. The Visuddhimagga (XVI,
164-168) explains by way of similes that although the present is
different from the past there is continuity. The being who is born is
not the same as the being of the past life, but it is conditioned by
the past. There is “neither absolute identity nor absolute
otherness”, as the Visuddhimagga explains. We read with regard to the
paṭisandhi-citta:

     “An echo, or its like, supplies The figures here; connectedness
     By continuity denies Identity and otherness. And here let the
     illustration of this consciousness be such things as an echo, a
     light, a seal impression, a looking glass image, for the fact of
     its not coming here from the previous becoming and for the fact
     that it arises owing to causes that are included in past
     becomings. For just as an echo, a light, a seal impression, and a
     shadow, have respectively sound, etc., as their cause and come
     into being without going elsewhere, so also this consciousness.”


19 Rebirth in different planes of existence (1)
***********************************************

Akusala kamma and kusala kamma of different beings can produce nineteen
different types of rebirth-consciousness, paṭisandhi-citta, in all,
arising in different planes of existence. The paṭisandhi-citta is
vipākacitta, the result of kamma. One paṭisandhi-citta is akusala
vipāka and eighteen types are kusala vipāka. There are many degrees
of each of these nineteen types of paṭisandhi-citta because the kamma
that produces them can be of many degrees. Birth in a woeful plane is
the result of a bad deed and birth in a happy plane is the result of a
good deed. Since the deeds of beings are of many different degrees of
kusala and akusala, the results are of many different degrees as well.
The paṭisandhi-citta that is akusala vipākacitta arises in an
unhappy plane of existence and the paṭisandhi-citta that is kusala
vipākacitta arises in a happy plane of existence. A plane of existence
is the place where one is born. There are different woeful planes and
different happy planes of existence. Only one type of
paṭisandhi-citta is akusala vipāka, but it is of many degrees. There
are many varieties of akusala kamma and thus there must be many
varieties of an unhappy rebirth. The unhappy rebirth we can see in this
world is birth as an animal. Apart from the animal world there are
three more classes of woeful planes, which we cannot see; they are the
world of petas (ghosts), the world of asuras (demons), and the hell
planes. There are different kinds of hell planes because there are many
degrees of akusala kamma which produce different kinds of unhappy
rebirth. The akusala vipāka in hell is more intense than the
sufferings which can be experienced in the human plane. The
descriptions of hells in the Buddhist teachings are not merely
allegories; the experience of unpleasant things through eyes, ears,
nose, tongue and bodysense is akusala vipāka and akusala vipāka is
reality. Life in a hell plane is not permanent; when one's lifespan in
a hell plane is over there can be rebirth in another plane. Birth as a
human being is a happy rebirth. In the human plane there is opportunity
for the development of kusala. One can study Dhamma and learn to
develop the way leading to the end of defilements, to the end of birth
and death. Birth in the human plane is kusala vipāka, but during one's
lifespan in this plane there are both kusala vipāka and akusala
vipāka. Each person experiences different results in life: there are
gain and loss, honour and dishonour, praise and blame, happiness and
misery. It is due to kamma whether someone is born into pleasant or
unpleasant surroundings, whether he belongs to a family which is
well-to-do or which is poor. The experience of pleasant and unpleasant
things through eyes, ears, nose, tongue and bodysense are the results
of kamma. Other happy planes, apart from the human plane, are the
heavenly planes. In the heavenly planes there is more kusala vipāka
than in the human plane and less akusala vipāka. There are several
heavenly planes and although life in a heavenly plane lasts a very long
time, it is not permanent. The woeful planes, the human plane and the
six heavenly planes which are deva planes, are sensuous planes of
existence. Sensuous planes of existence are planes where there is
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, the experience of tangible object
through the bodysense and other kāmāvacara cittas (cittas of the
sensuous plane of consciousness). There are eleven classes of sensuous
planes of existence in all. In the “Discourse on the Lesser Analysis
of Deeds” (Middle Length Sayings III, sutta 135) we read that Subha
asks the Buddha what the cause is of the different results human beings
experience from the time of their birth:

     “Now, good Gotama, what is the cause, what is the reason that
     lowness and excellence are to be seen among human beings while
     they are in human form? For, good Gotama, human beings of short
     lifespan are to be seen and those of long lifespan; those of many
     and those of few illnesses; those who are ugly, those who are
     beautiful; those who are of little account, those of great
     account; those who are poor, those who are wealthy; those who are
     of lowly families, those of high families; those who are weak in
     wisdom, those who are full of wisdom.” The Buddha answered
     Subha: ”Deeds are one’s own, brahman youth, beings are heirs
     to deeds, deeds are matrix, deeds are kin, deeds are arbiters.
     Deed divides beings, that is to say by lowness and excellence.”


20 Rebirth in different Planes of Existence (2)
***********************************************

Rebirth-consciousness does not only arise in sensuous planes of
existence, kāma-bhūmi, it can also arise in higher heavenly planes
which are not sensuous planes of existence. If one is born in one of
the kāma-bhūmis and one sees the disadvantage of sense impressions,
one may cultivate jhāna, absorption. Then one can, besides
kāmāvacara cittas, also have rūpa-jhānacittas and
arūpa-jhānacittas. If one cultivates the eightfold Path one can have
lokuttara cittas, supramundane cittas which directly experience
nibbāna. There are four planes of citta: kāmāvacara cittas,
rūpāvacāra cittas which are rūpajhānacittas, arūpāvacāra cittas
which are arūpajhānacittas and lokuttara cittas. Which of these
planes of citta a particular citta belongs to, depends on the object it
experiences. Kāmāvacara citta experiences a sense object.
Rūpāvacāra cittas and arūpāvacāra cittas experience with
absorption the meditation subjects of rūpa-jhāna and arūpa-jhāna.
Lokuttara citta experiences nibbāna. A plane of citta is different
from a plane of existence which, as we have seen, is the place where
rebirth-consciousness arises.
When someone attains jhāna, the kusala kamma he performs is not
kāmāvacara kusala kamma; at the moment of jhāna there are no sense
impressions. The kusala kamma which is jhāna does not produce result
in the same lifespan one attains it, but it can produce result in the
form of paṭisandhi-citta, the paṭisandhi-citta of the next life. In
that case there are jhānacittas arising shortly before death and the
paṭisandhi-citta of the next life experiences the same object as
those jhānacittas. The result of rūpāvacara kusala citta (kusala
citta which is rūpa-jhānacitta) is birth in a heavenly plane which is
not kāma-bhūmi (sensuous plane of existence) but a rūpa-brahma-plane
(fine-material world). The result of an arūpāvacara kusala citta
(kusala citta which is arūpa-jhānacitta) is birth in a heavenly plane
which is an arūpa-brahma plane (immaterial world). There are different
rūpa-brahma planes and arūpa-brahma planes. Those who attain
rūpa-jhāna can be reborn in rūpa-brahma-planes where there are less
sense-impressions. There are sixteen rūpa-brahma planes in all. One of
these is the plane of unconscious beings, asaññasatta. Those who
cultivate rūpa-jhāna and see the disadvantage of nāma may be reborn
in a plane where there is only rūpa, not nāma. Thus, here there is
not a rebirth-consciousness, only rūpa-paṭisandhi. Those who see the
disadvantages of the meditation subjects of rūpa-jhāna which are
still bound up with materiality, cultivate arūpa-jhāna. If they
attain arūpa-jhāna they can be reborn in arūpa-brahma planes where
there is no rūpa, only nāma. There are four classes of arūpa-brahma
planes. There are thirty-one classes of planes of existence in all,
namely:

   11 sensuous planes:

   * 4 woeful planes

   * 1 human plane
   * 6 deva planes

   * 16 rūpa-brahma planes

   * 4 arūpa-brahma planes


   Kusala kamma can cause a happy rebirth, but the end of birth is to
be preferred to any kind of rebirth. If one cultivates the eightfold
Path and attains arahatship there will be no more rebirth. The
dying-consciousness (cuti-citta) of the arahat is not succeeded by a
paṭisandhi-citta. The Buddha reminded people of the dangers of birth
and encouraged them to be mindful, in order to attain the
“deathless'” which is nibbāna. We read in the
Mahā-parinibbāna-sutta (Dialogues of the Buddha I, no. 16, chapter I,
1-4):

     “... The Exalted One proceeded with a great company of the monks
     to Kotigāma; and there he stayed in the village itself. And at
     that place the Exalted One addressed the monks, and said: ‘It is
     through not understanding and grasping four Ariyan Truths, O
     monks, that we have had to run so long, to wander so long in this
     weary path of rebirth, both you and I!’ And what are these four?
     The Ariyan truth about dukkha; the Ariyan truth about the cause of
     dukkha; the Ariyan truth about the cessation of dukkha; and the
     Ariyan truth about the path that leads to that cessation. But when
     these Ariyan truths are grasped and known the craving for future
     life is rooted out, that which leads to renewed becoming is
     destroyed, and then there is no more birth!’ ”


21 Accumulated inclinations
***************************

The first citta in a life span is the rebirth-consciousness or
paṭisandhi-citta. It is a vipākacitta produced by kamma and it links
the past life to the present life. As we have seen, there are nineteen
types of vipākacitta that can perform the function of rebirth. The
paṭisandhi-citta is succeeded by the bhavanga-citta (life-continuum).
The bhavanga-citta is the same type of citta as the paṭisan-dhi-citta
and it experiences the same object. As we have seen, this object is the
same as the object experienced by the last javana-cittas of the
previous life and it is conditioned by the kamma that produces the
rebirth-consciousness of the following life. The bhavanga-citta keeps
the continuity in a lifespan. So long as one is still alive,
bhavanga-cittas arise and fall away during the time there is no
sense-door process or mind-door process of cittas. Bhavanga-cittas
arise in between the different processes of cittas which experience an
object through one of the six doors. It performs its function of
keeping the continuity in life until the dying-consciousness, the
cuti-citta, arises and one passes away from this life. The
dying-consciousness of a life that is ending experiences the same
object as all the previous bhavanga-cittas and it is of the same type.
Thus, the rebirth-consciousness, the bhavanga-citta and the
dying-consciousness do not experience objects that impinge on the six
doors like the cittas that arise in the different processes. The whole
day cittas arising in processes experience objects through eyes, ears,
nose, tongue, bodysense and mind-door and in between the processes
there are bhavanga-cittas. Each citta is succeeded by a following citta
in the long series of cittas in our life, there isn’t any moment
without citta. In the course of life kammas produce different
vipākacittas which experience objects through the eyes, the ears, the
nose, the tongue and the bodysense. Vipākacittas neither like nor
dislike the object, they do not react to the object in an unwholesome
or a wholesome way. However, shortly after they have fallen away there
are cittas which react to the objects experienced through the senses
either in an unwholesome way or in a wholesome way. Akusala cittas or
kusala cittas arising in a sense-door process or mind-door process, are
called javana-cittas (literally: readiness, impulse, going). They arise
usually in a sequence of seven cittas of the same type. They fall away
immediately but the inclination to akusala and kusala is accumulated so
that there are conditions for the arising again of akusala citta and
kusala citta. Since each citta is succeeded by the next citta without
any interval, the process of accumulation can go on from moment to
moment, from one life to a next life. Each moment of kusala citta or
akusala citta arising today is a condition for the arising of kusala
citta or akusala citta in the future. There are different types of
kusala citta and of akusala citta. It is important to learn more about
them in order to understand ourselves, about the way we behave towards
others in action and speech, and the way we react towards pleasant and
unpleasant events. It is citta which motivates good deeds and evil
deeds and these will produce their results accordingly. The Buddha
exhorted people to abstain from akusala, to perform kusala, to purify
the mind, and his impressive words were a real support for people to
follow his advice.

22 Four Planes of Consciousness (part 1)
****************************************

There are many ways of classifying citta and one way is the
classification by way of plane of consciousness, in Pali: bhūmi. There
are four planes of consciousness:

   * the sensuous plane of consciousness, kāma-bhūmi,

   * the plane of rūpa-jhāna, rūpa-bhūmi,

   * the plane of arūpa-jhāna, arūpa-bhūmi,

   * the plane of supramundane citta, lokuttara-bhūmi

   As we have seen, plane of consciousness is different from plane of
existence which is the place where one is born. What plane of
consciousness a citta belongs to depends on the object it experiences.
The sensuous plane of consciousness (kāmāvacara cittas) are the
cittas that experience sense objects, such as seeing, hearing,
smelling, tasting, the experience of tangible object through the
bodysense and the experience of these objects through the mind-door. On
account of pleasant and unpleasant objects experienced through the
senses, kusala cittas (wholesome cittas) and akusala cittas
(unwholesome cittas) arise. We usually cling to all the sense objects.
Those who see the disadvantage of sense impressions and the defilements
bound up with them cultivate samatha (tranquil meditation) and may
attain absorption (jhāna). The jhānacitta is of another plane of
citta, and this is higher than the sensuous plane of citta.
Jhānacittas do not experience sense objects, they experience with
absorption a meditation subject through the mind-door. For the
development of samatha, tranquil meditation, it is essential to have a
keen understanding of the characteristic of calm and of the way to
develop calm with a suitable meditation subject. True calm has to be
wholesome, it is freedom from defilements. Right understanding,
paññā, that knows precisely when the citta is kusala citta and when
akusala citta is indispensable. When the objective of citta is not
dāna, sīla or mental development, bhāvanā, the citta is usually
akusala, but we may not notice this. Indifferent feeling seems to be
very calm, but actually, indifferent feeling arises with kusala citta
as well as with akusala citta rooted in attachment or rooted in
ignorance. One may be attached to silence, and without right
understanding one may erroneously believe that there is kusala citta
with calm. The Visuddhimagga (Chapters IV-XII) describes forty
meditation subjects which can condition calm such as disks (kasinas),
recollection of the excellent qualities of the Triple Gem, mindfulness
of death, loving-kindness or mindfulness of breathing. A meditation
subject does not necessarily bring about calm. Only when there is right
understanding of calm and the way to develop it, calm can grow. Through
samatha the “hindrances” (nīvaraṇa), which are akusala
cetasikas, are temporarily suppressed. The hindrances arise time and
again in daily life. They are sensuous desire (kāmacchandha), ill-will
(vyāpāda), torpor and languor (thīna and middha), restlessness and
worry (uddhacca and kukkucca) and doubt (vicikicchā). Someone who
wants to develop samatha so as to be able to attain jhāna, has to
develop five jhāna-factors which can inhibit the hindrances, and these
are the following cetasikas:

   * applied thinking (vitakka)

   * sustained thinking (vicāra)

   * rapture (pīti)

   * happy feeling (sukha)

   * concentration (samādhi)

   Jhāna is developed in stages, with each succeeding stage being more
refined than the preceding one. For the first stage of rūpa-jhāna it
is still necessary that all five jhāna-factors arise with the
jhānacitta, but at each higher stage, when one has become more
advanced, jhāna-factors are successively abandoned. Jhānacittas do
not produce vipāka in the same lifespan: their result is rebirth in
higher planes of existence. The result of rūpāvacara kusala cittas is
rebirth in rūpa-brahma planes. Those who have attained the highest
stage of rūpa-jhāna and see the disadvantages of rūpa-jhāna which
is still dependent on materiality, might want to cultivate
arūpa-jhāna or “immaterial jhāna”. The meditation subjects of
arūpa-jhāna are not connected with materiality. There are four stages
of arūpa-jhāna and each one of these is more subtle and more peaceful
than the preceding one. These stages are: the “Sphere of Boundless
Space” (ākāsānañcāyatana), the “Sphere of Boundless
Consciousness” (viññāṇañcāyatana), the “Sphere of
Nothingness” (ākiñcaññāyatana), and the “Sphere of Neither
Perception Nor Non-Perception”
(n’eva-saññā-n’āsaññāyatana). Even when one has attained the
highest stage of jhāna, defilements cannot be eradicated. They can
only be eradicated by lokuttara magga-citta.

23 The Four Planes of Consciousness (part 2)
********************************************

As we have seen, there are four planes of citta: the sensuous plane of
consciousness, the plane of rūpa-jhāna, the plane of arūpa-jhāna,
and the plane of lokuttara citta, supramundane citta. When
enlightenment is attained lokuttara cittas arise which directly
experience nibbāna. The lokuttara citta is the highest plane of
consciousness. There are four stages of enlightenment: the stages of
the sotāpanna (streamwinner), the sakadāgāmī (once-returner), the
anāgāmī (no-returner) and the arahat. At each of these stages the
lokuttara kusala citta, the path-consciousness (magga-citta), arises
which experiences nibbāna and eradicates defilements. The magga-citta
of each of these stages is succeeded immediately by the lokuttara
vipākacitta, the fruition-consciousness (phala-citta) which also
experiences nibbāna.
Wrong view has to be eradicated first. So long as one takes realities
for self there cannot be the eradication of any defilement. The
sotāpanna, the ariyan who has attained the first stage of
enlightenment, has eradicated diṭṭhi completely, so that it can
never arise again, but he has not eradicated all defilements.
Defilements are eradicated stage by stage and only when arahatship has
been attained all defilements have been eradicated. Only the right
Path, the eightfold Path, can lead to enlightenment. The eightfold Path
is developed by being mindful of the nāma and rūpa which appear in
daily life, such as seeing, visible object, hearing, sound, thinking,
feeling, attachment, anger or the other defilements which arise. This
is actually the development of vipassanā, insight-wisdom. There are
several stages of insight-wisdom. The characteristics of nāma and
rūpa have to be investigated over and over again until they are
clearly understood as they are and there is no more wrong view about
them. The realization of the arising and falling away of nāma and
rūpa, their impermanence, is a higher stage of insight which cannot be
attained so long as the characteristic of nāma cannot be distinguished
from the characteristic of rūpa. All the different stages of insight
have to be attained in the right order. Paññā should continue to
investigate the characteristics of realities as they appear through the
six doors so that the three characteristics of conditioned realities,
namely: impermanence (anicca), dukkha and non-self (anattā), can be
penetrated more and more. When paññā has clearly understood these
three characteristics enlightenment can be attained. Paññā which has
become lokuttara paññā experiences nibbāna, the unconditioned
reality. Nibbāna does not arise and fall away; it is the end of the
arising and falling away of nāma and rūpa, the end of birth, old age,
sickness and death. Nibbāna is the end of dukkha. When one has
attained the first stage of enlightenment, the stage of the sotāpanna,
it is certain that there will eventually be an end to the cycle of
birth and death, an end to dukkha. When the person who is not an arahat
dies, the last citta of his life, the cuti-citta (dying-consciousness)
is succeeded by the paṭisandhi-citta (rebirth-consciousness) of the
next life and thus life goes on. So long as there are defilements life
has to continue. The fact that we are here in the human plane is
conditioned by defilements. Even if there is birth in a heavenly plane,
in a rūpa-brahma plane or in an arūpa-brahma plane, it is conditioned
by defilements. The arahat has no more defilements, he does not have to
be reborn in any plane. For him there will not be the arising of nāma
and rūpa in a new life any more, and this means the end to the cycle
of birth and death. We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Kindred Sayings
on Sense, Third Fifty, Chapter 5, §152, Is there a Method?), that the
Buddha spoke to the monks about the method to realize through direct
experience the end to dukkha:

     “Herein, monks, a monk, seeing visible object with the eye,
     either recognizes within him the existence of lust, malice and
     illusion, thus: ‘I have lust, malice and illusion,’ or
     recognizes the non-existence of these qualities within him, thus:
     ‘I have not lust, malice and illusion.’ Now as to that
     recognition of their existence or non-existence within him, are
     these conditions, I ask, to be understood by belief, or
     inclination, or hearsay, or argument as to method, or reflection
     on reasons, or delight in speculation?’ ‘Surely not, lord.’
     ‘Are not these states to be understood by seeing them with the
     eye of wisdom?’ ‘Surely, lord.’ ‘Then, monks, this is the
     method by following which, apart from belief… a monk could
     affirm insight thus: Ended is birth, lived is the righteous life,
     done is the task, for life in these conditions there is no
     hereafter.’ ”

   We then read that the same is said with regard to the experiences
through the doorways of the ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and mind. The
development of understanding of all that is real, also of one’s
defilements, is the way leading to the eradication of defilements, to
the end of rebirth. This is the end to dukkha.

24 Latent Tendencies
********************

Defilements, akusala cetasikas, are of different levels, they may be
subtle or more coarse. Defilements that are transgressions (vītikkama
kilesa), are coarse defilements of the degree of unwholesome courses of
action through body or speech. Defilements one is possessed with and
that arise with akusala citta (pari- yuṭṭhāna kilesa) are medium
defilements that disturb the citta. Latent tendencies (anusaya kilesa)
are subtle defilements that lie dormant in the citta and do not arise
but condition the arising of akusala citta. The latent tendencies are
enumerated in the Tipiṭaka and the Commentaries, where it is stated
that the Buddha, the Fully Enlightened One, understood these by his
perfect knowledge of beings’ biases and underlying tendencies
(āsayānusaya ñāṇa). Since each citta that arises and falls away
is immediately succeeded by the next citta, unwholesome and wholesome
behaviour and inclinations are accumulated from moment to moment and
from life to life. The latent tendencies which are unwholesome
inclinations that are accumulated are the following: sense-desire
(kāma-rāga), aversion (paṭigha), conceit (māna), wrong view
(diṭṭhi), doubt (vicikicchā), desire for becoming (continued
existence, bhavarāga), and ignorance (avijjā). It is essential to
have more understanding of the latent tendencies and their power. They
are called subtle defilements because they do not arise with the
akusala citta, but they are powerful. Since they have not been
eradicated they can strongly condition and influence our behaviour.
They lie dormant in the citta like microbes infesting the body. So long
as they have not been eradicated we are like sick people, because they
can condition the arising of akusala citta when there are the
appropriate conditions. They can condition the arising of akusala citta
even to the degree of transgression of sīla at any time, and thus,
more defilements are accumulated again and added to the latent
tendencies. The teaching of the latent tendencies helps us to see why
the defilements in our life are so tenacious, arising again and again,
and why their arising is unforeseeable and uncontrollable. When we
study the enumeration of the latent tendencies, we should remember that
these latent tendencies are not abstract notions. The latent tendency
of sense-desire or sensuous clinging conditions akusala citta with
attachment to any kind of pleasant object. We may have expectations as
to kind words or praise from other people. This is selfish desire that
has been deeply accumulated and is very powerful. The latent tendency
of aversion conditions akusala citta with aversion, but we should know
that this has many shades. It is not only a matter of hate or anger,
but it also arises when we are upset or depressed because we do not
receive the pleasant object we were hoping for. The latent tendency of
conceit conditions the arising of akusala citta with clinging to the
importance of self. It can arise on account of any object experienced
through the six doorways, and it often motivates our speech and
actions. All latent tendencies condition the arising of akusala citta,
but because of accumulated ignorance we do not notice their arising, we
are deluded time and again. The latent tendencies are subsequently
eradicated by the lokuttara magga-citta of each of the four stages of
enlightenment. Wrong view and doubt are eradicated at the first stage,
the stage of the sotāpanna. At the second stage sense-desire and
aversion are not yet eradicated but they are diminished. They are
completely eradicated at the third stage, the stage of the anāgāmi.
Conceit, desire for becoming and ignorance are eradicated at the stage
of the arahat. Thus we see that the eradication of the latent
tendencies takes a long time. It can only be achieved by the
development of understanding of all dhammas appearing in daily life.

25 The Seven Books of the Abhidhamma
************************************

26 Introduction
***************

The Abhidhamma consists of the following seven books:

  1. Dhammasangaṇī (translated as “Buddhist Psychological
     Ethics”, P.T.S. and also translated by U Kyaw, Myanmar.)

  2. Vibhaṅga (translated as “Book of Analysis”, P.T.S.)

  3. Dhātukathā (Translated as “Discourse on Elements”, P.T.S.)

  4. Puggalapaññatti (Translated as “A Designation of Human
     Types”, P.T.S.)

  5. Kathāvatthu (Translated as “Points of Controversy”, P.T.S.)

  6. Yamaka (the Book of Pairs, not translated into English)

  7. Paṭṭhāna (Translated in part as “Conditional Relations”,
     P.T.S. )

   A summary of the contents of these seven books has been given by
Ven. Nyanatiloka in his “Guide through the Abhidhamma Piṭaka”
(B.P.S. Kandy, 1971) and also by U Kyaw Khine in the introduction to
his translation of the Dhammasaṅganī. Therefore, I will render only
some salient features of each book with the purpose to show that the
classifications found in the Abhidhamma are not mere lists to be read
and memorized. They all point to the investigation of the realities of
our daily life. In this way the paññā is developed that sees
realities as they are, as impermanent, dukkha and anattā. This kind of
paññā leads to the eradication of defilements. The commentary to the
Dhammasaṅganī, the first book, is the “Atthasālinī”, edited by
the venerable Buddhaghosa and translated as “Expositor”. The
Dhammasaṅganī begins with the Mātika, a table of contents or
matrix, which is an introduction. It is more extensive than a table of
contents. This mātikā has been arranged by way of triads and dyads.
It is a survey of the contents of the first book and can even serve as
an introduction to all seven books. Different groups of defilements
have been listed, such as the intoxicants (āsavas), fetters, ties,
floods, yokes, hindrances. After the Abhidhamma matrix there is a
Suttanta matrix, explaining sutta terms. The Atthasālinī, the
commentary to the Dhammasaṅganī, dedicates a whole chapter to
explain the notions of the Mātika. The Mātikā begins with: kusala
dhammā, akusala dhammā, avyākata dhammā. In these three terms all
that is real has been contained. In avyākata dhammā, indeterminate
dhammas, are included all realities that are not kusala or akusala,
namely: vipākacittas, kiriyacittas, rūpas and nibbāna. The whole
Tipiṭaka is directed towards the liberation from the cycle of birth
and death through insight. This appears also in the Mātika, where we
read (1013-1015):

     "Dhammas going to building up; going to pulling down; going to
     neither." The Atthasālinī elaborates: "... 'accumulation' means
     that which is accumulated by kamma and corruptions. It is a name
     for the processes of rebirth and decease. 'Leading to
     accumulation' are 'those causes which by being accomplished to go
     to, lead a man, in whom they arise, to that round of rebirth'. It
     is a name for co-intoxicant moral or immoral states. Nibbāna
     being free from 'cumulation', which is another word for
     'accumulation', is called dispersion. 'Leading to dispersion' is
     'going towards that dispersion which he has made his object.' It
     is a name for the Ariyan Paths. Or, 'leading to accumulation' are
     those states which go about severally arranging (births and deaths
     in) a round of destiny like a bricklayer who arranges bricks,
     layer by layer, in a wall.' 'Leading to dispersion' are those
     states which go about destroying that very round, like a man who
     continually removes the bricks as they are laid by the mason."


27 The Dhammasaṅganī, the first Book of the Abhidhamma
*********************************************************

The Dhammasaṅganī, begins, after the Mātika, with a description of
mahā-kusala citta accompanied by paññā. It enumerates all the
sobhana cetasikas assisting this citta while they accompany it just for
a moment. It refers to mahā-kusala citta experiencing an object, be it
visible object, sound, odour, flavour, tangible object or dhamma
object. This points to daily life. Time and again citta experiences an
object through one of the six doors. The Dhammasaṅganī states with
regard to the first type of mahā-kusala citta of the sense sphere:
”At a time (yasmiṃ samaye) when mahā-kusala citta of the sense
sphere accompanied by joy and associated with understanding has
arisen...” and then sums up the accompanying cetasikas. The
“Expositor” (p. 76) explains the word samaya as time, occasion,
concurrence of conditions, the mutual contribution towards the
production of a common result: “By this word showing thus the
condition, the conceit of one who believes that states unconditionally
follow one’s own will is subdued.” We cling to the idea of our own
will that can direct dhammas, but this is not according to reality.
Will or volition, be it wholesome, unwholesome or indeterminate, is
only a conditioned element. The mahā-kusala citta is accompanied by
the cetasikas that always accompany citta, the “universals”, such
as contact, feeling or remembrance, saññā, as well as by the
“particulars”, pakinnakas, cetasikas that accompany many cittas but
not all. Then follows a list of all the sobhana cetasikas necessary for
the arising of even one moment of kusala citta of the sense sphere. For
example, the cetasika confidence or faith, saddhā, always has to
accompany kusala citta. If there is no confidence in kusala, kusala
citta could not arise. There have to be non-attachment and
non-aversion. When we perform dāna or observe sīla we are not
selfish, we are not thinking of our own pleasure and comfort. There is
calm with each kusala citta, at such a moment there is no agitation.
There has to be sati which is non-forgetful of kusala. Sobhana
cetasikas are necessary so that mahā-kusala citta with paññā can
arise just for one extremely brief moment and perform its function, and
then citta and cetasikas fall away together. The cetasikas condition
the citta by way of conascence-condition and by several other
conditions. Thus, we cannot make kusala arise at will, it has no
possessor; there is no one who can direct its arising. It arises when
the right conditions are present and then it falls away immediately;
nobody can cause it to last. All the sobhana cetasikas that fall away
are accumulated from moment to moment so that there are conditions for
the arising again of kusala citta. We shall see that several cetasikas
are listed more than once under different aspects, such as
understanding as faculty, or as power. The list ends with: sampajañña
(sati and pañña), samatha, vipassanā, paggāha (grasp, which is the
faculty of energy), avikkhepa (balance, self-collectedness, another
word for ekaggata cetasika, one-pointedness or concentration). Thus we
see that these lists are not a mere summing up, but that they point to
the development of right understanding of realities.

28 The Vibhaṅga, the Second Book of the Abhidhamma
****************************************************

The second book of the Abhidhamma is the Vibhaṅga, the Book of
Analysis, and its commentary is the “Sammoha Vinodanī” ,
translated as the “Dispeller of Delusion” (P.T.S.). The Vibhaṅga
gives an explanation of the khandhas (aggregates), āyatanas (sense
bases), dhātus (elements), and several other subjects. It gives
explanations according to the Suttanta method, by way of conventional
terms, and the Abhidhamma method, by way of ultimate realities. It also
has sections of interrogation. The aim is, as is the case of the whole
of the Abhidhamma, to develop right understanding of nāma and rūpa as
they appear in daily life. This book helps one to know more about the
deeper-lying motives of one’s thoughts and actions. One may take them
for wholesome, but in fact there are very often selfish motives that
are unnoticed. The section on ‘the Small Items’ (Khuddakavatthu
Vibhaṅga) is most revealing in the descriptions of akusala such as
conceit. It gives an impressive list of all the objects on account of
which conceit may arise (832), namely: pride of birth, of clan, of
health, of youth, of life, of gain, of being honoured, of being
respected, of prominence, of having adherents, of wealth, of
appearance, of erudition, of intelligence, of being a knowledgeable
authority.... Conceit is compared to hoisting a banner; at the moment
of conceit one finds oneself important. There are many definitions of
akusala, but the purpose is to know them when they arise through the
development of satipaṭṭhāna. We read in the section of “the
Heart of the Teaching” (1031): “The three bad roots are to be known
fully, are to be comprehended, are to be abandoned...” Abandonment
can only be accomplished by fully knowing them and comprehending them.
Among the many word explanations we read about understanding (here
translated as awareness, 525): “Therein what is awareness? That which
is wisdom, understanding, investigation, research, truth investigation,
discernment, discrimination, differentiation, erudition, proficiency,
subtlety, analysis, consideration, breadth, sagacity, guidance,
insight, awareness, goad, wisdom, controlling faculty of wisdom, power
of wisdom, sword of wisdom, tower of wisdom, light of wisdom, lustre of
wisdom, splendour of wisdom, jewel of wisdom, absence of dullness,
truth investigation, right view...” It is well worth to consider
these definitions. When we read about the subtlety of wisdom we are
reminded that the teachings are very subtle and have to be carefully
considered. Only thus there can be the lustre and splendour of wisdom
that causes the darkness of ignorance to disappear.

29 The Dhātu-Kathā, the Third Book
************************************

The third book of the Abhidhamma is the Discourse on Elements,
Dhātu-Kathā. This book deals with all realities, classified with
reference to the khandhas, the āyatanas (translated as bases) and the
dhātus, elements. It deals with realities that are ‘included’(
sangahita), or not included (asangahita), and this pertains to the
different classifications of dhammas. It deals with dhammas that are
associated (sampayutta) or dissociated (vippayutta). Only nāma can be
associated with another nāma, such as citta and cetasikas. Rūpa does
not have such a close association with nāma. The charts added by the
translator makes the reading of these classifications easier. But we
should not forget that all these classifications pertain to the reality
appearing at this moment. The khandhas are citta, cetasika and rūpa
arising and falling away at this moment. When seeing arises, there is
the khandha of consciousness, viññāṇakkhandha, and there are the
accompanying cetasikas: the khandha of feeling, vedanākkhandha,
saññākhandha, saṅkhārakkhandha (including other cetasikas apart
from feeling and saññā), and there is eyesense which is
rūpakkhandha. As to the āyatanas, there are six internal āyatanas
and six external āyatanas. The internal āyatanas are the five senses
and mind-base, manāyatana, which includes all cittas. The external
āyatanas are the five sense objects and dammāyatana, which includes
cetasikas, subtle rūpas and nibbāna. When we see, hear or think we
believe that a self experiences different objects, but in reality there
is the association of the internal āyatana and the external āyatana,
the objects “outside”. As to the elements, these can be classified
in different ways, and in this book they are classified as eighteen:
the five senses, the five sense objects, the “five pairs” of
sense-cognitions experiencing the five sense-objects (one of each pair
being kusala vipākacitta and one akusala vipākacitta), and in
addition: mind-element (mano-dhātu), dhamma-dhātu and
mind-consciousness- element (mano-viññāṇa-dhātu). Mind-element
and mind-consciousness-element comprise cittas other than the
sense-cognitions. Dhamma-dhātu comprises cetasikas, the subtle rūpas
(sukhuma rūpas) and nibbāna. In all these classifications concepts
such as person or thing have not been included. Only paramattha dhammas
have been included. We may think of concepts, but these are not real in
the ultimate sense. Thinking itself is citta, it is a reality. If there
is no understanding of realities as just elements, we shall continue to
cling to the wrong view of self who sees, hears or thinks. Seeing is a
dhātu that experiences an object, it is nāma. Visible object is
rūpa, it is included in rūpakkhandha. Visible object or colour does
not know anything, it is dissociated (vippayutta) from nāma, it is
completely different from seeing.
Dhātus are not mere names, they have characteristics that can be
directly experienced when they appear. We are reminded by the
Dhātukathā that the teaching on elements pertains to realities
appearing at this moment which are anattā, devoid of a self.

30 Puggalapaññatti, the fourth Book
*************************************

The fourth book of the Abhidhamma is the Puggalapaññatti (Translated
as “A Designation of Human Types”). This book deals with the cittas
and the different accumulated tendencies of individuals. Some people
are easily inclined to anger, whereas others are full of mettā. We
read about an angry person: ‘What sort of person is angry? What then
is anger? That which is anger, and the state of being angry, hatred,
hating, hatefulness, malice, the act of being malicious, maliciousness,
hostility, enmity, rudeness, abruptness, resentment of heart- this is
called anger. He who has not got rid of this anger is said to be an
angry person.” In this definition we read about the “state of being
angry”, and this teaches us that anger is not a person, that it is a
dhamma which is conditioned. We think of an angry person, but anger,
after it has arisen, is gone completely, it does not last. The contents
of this book are the evil and good qualities of individuals, but
actually, these are cetasikas, mental factors arising because of
conditions. Thus, we are constantly reminded that these are not
persons, they are impermanent and not self. We read (II, 17) about a
person who is guarded as to the sense-doors. There is no person who is
guarding the sense-doors, but the realities of sati and paññā are
guarding the sense-doors. When there is mindfulness and understanding
of visible object appearing through the eye-door, of sound appearing
through the ear-door, of the other sense objects appearing through the
other sense-doors, one is not enslaved by these objects but one learns
to see these realities as they are: impermanent and non-self. At such
moments there is no opportunity for akusala cittas rooted in lobha,
dosa and moha. Some persons are able to attain jhāna, others do not.
We read (I, 30):

     “Which is the person who is twice-liberated
     (ubhatobhāga-vimutta)? It is one who, in his own person, has
     attained to the eight liberations (jhānas), and through wise
     penetration his taints (āsava) have come to extinction.” (I,
     31) “Which is the person who is liberated by wisdom
     (paññā-vimutta)? It is one who has not attained, in his own
     person, to the eight liberations, but through wise penetration his
     taints have come to extinction.”
     When we read about the attainments of different individuals we
     should not forget that these are citta and cetasikas with highly
     developed paññā.


31 Kathāvatthu, the Fifth Book
*******************************

The Fifth book of the Abhidhamma is the Kathāvatthu (Translated as
“Points of Controversy”). Its commentary has been translated as
“The Debates Commentary”, P.T.S.) This book which is a treatise
against schismatic monks has been composed by Moggali-putta-tissa. It
was recited at the third Buddhist Council. The First Buddhist Council
was held by fivehundred arahats headed by the Venerable Mahākassapa in
Rājagaha shortly after the Buddha passed away. Here the Abhidhamma
Piṭaka was also included along with the Vinaya and Suttanta. The
Second Buddhist Council was held by sevenhundred arahats headed by the
Venerable Mahāyasa one century after the Buddha’s passing away. The
version of the Texts in the First Buddhist Council was re-approved or
re-affirmed. The Third Buddhist Council was convened by King Asoka at
Pataḷiputta, about 240 B.C. Thousand Arahats were headed by
Moggaliputta-Tissa Thera who preached the Kathāvatthu treatise against
schismatic monks. At that time there were seventeen schismatic schools.
Thereupon, the Abhidhamma-Piṭaka reached its completeness and became
seven books. The Kathāvatthu consists of questions and answers, it is
a dialogue between the sakavādin (theravada) and the opponent. For
example, the first question is: ‘Is there, in the absolute sense, any
personality (puggala) to be found?’. In the teachings the term person
is used in figurative speech, in conventional sense, but in the
ultimate sense there is no person. Schismatic monks believed that a
person really existed. Similar questions about the person or the world
are raised today. We read, for instance, about questions on rebirth.
The opponent thinks: ‘the person transmigrates’. The Sakavādin
asks whether it is the identical person who transmigrates or a
different person. Or, the question is asked (Ch VIII, 75) whether there
is an intermediate stage between the end of a lifespan and the
beginning of the next life at rebirth. This book covers a wide range of
subjects, and each question is viewed from various angles. We read
about speculative questions with regard to the Dependent Origination,
the four Truths, kamma and result, emancipation, arahats, the future
and the present, destinies, impermanence, jhāna attainments, insight
and many other subjects. Such questions can remind us that so long as
understanding of the dhamma appearing at this moment is not being
developed stage by stage, there will always be doubt and ignorance of
the truth.

32 Yamaka, the Sixth Book of the Abhidhamma
*******************************************

The Sixth Book of the Abhidhamma is the ‘Yamaka”, the Book of
Pairs. This book and its commentary have not been translated into
English. Venerable Nyanatiloka renders a summary of it in his “Guide
through the Abhidhamma Piṭaka”. This book consists of questions and
answers about subjects such as the roots (mūla), the khandhas, the
āyatanas, the dhātus, the four noble truths, the conditions and the
anusayas, latent tendencies. These questions and answers can correct
misunderstandings that may arise about the terms used in the
scriptures. For instance, one may think that with regard to the first
noble Truth, the Truth of dukkha, dukkha is the same as unhappy
feeling. Dukkha is often translated as sorrow and this is misleading.
We learn that the Truth of dukkha does not only refer to painful
feeling but to all phenomena that arise because of conditions and fall
away. Since they are impermanent they cannot be of any refuge and are
therefore dukkha. The text of this book is rather compact and therefore
it is most helpful to study it together with its commentary. We shall
see that the subjects of this book are not theoretical but that they
pertain to daily life. When we, for example, read about the latent
tendencies, there are short lists, but the commentary goes very deeply
into this subject, it is most revealing. As we have seen, the latent
tendencies are sense desire, aversion, conceit, wrong view, doubt,
craving for existence and ignorance. In the text we read: “Where does
the bias of sensuous craving adhere? To the two feelings”. These are
happy feeling and indifferent feeling. The commentary states: “When
the latent tendency of sense desire arises it is conascent with
unwholesome pleasant feeling or indifferent feeling, and it can also
take these two feelings as object. It can also take as object the
feelings that accompany kusala citta, vipākacitta and kiriyacitta of
the sense-sphere.” We read in the commentary:

     “When the latent tendency of sense desire arises...”

   We should know that the word “arisen” (uppanna) has several
meanings. In the context of the latent tendencies, it is said:

     “arisen” in the sense of “having obtained a soil”
     (bhumiladdhuppanna), which means: not cut off. “Arisen in the
     sense of having obtained a soil” refers to the defilements which
     have not been eradicated and which have obtained a soil. Thus, the
     latent tendencies do not arise with the citta, they condition the
     arising of akusala citta.

   We also read in the commentary:

     “Surely, the latent tendency of sense desire that adheres to an
     object, does not merely adhere to these two feelings and to the
     dhammas that are conascent with them. It also adheres to visible
     object that is desirable, and so on.

   The Buddha taught in the ‘Book of Analysis’ (Ch 16, Analysis of
Knowledge, 816, And what is the latent tendency of beings?):

     “That which in the world is a lovely thing, pleasant thing
     (piyarūpaṃ, sātarūpaṃ), the latent tendency of sense desire
     of beings adheres to this...”

   Thus, desirable nāma dhammas and rūpa dhammas can be the objects
of sense desire. When sense desire arises and has as object desirable
nāmas and rūpas, the accumulation of the latent tendency of sense
desire continues. Whenever there is a pleasant object sense desire
clings. We can verify this in daily life. The only dhammas that are not
objects of clinging are the nine lokuttara dhammas of nibbāna and the
eight lokuttara cittas.

33 The Paṭṭhāna, the seventh book of the Abhidhamma
********************************************************

The Seventh Book of the Abhidhamma is the “Paṭṭhāna”
(translated partly by the Venerable U Nārada as “Conditional
Relations”). The translator also wrote a “Guide to Conditional
Relations” with many explanations. The “Paṭṭhāna” describes
in detail all possible relations between phenomena. There are
twentyfour classes of conditions. Each reality in our life can only
occur because of a concurrence of different conditions which operate in
a very intricate way. These conditions are not abstractions, they
operate now, in our daily life. What we take for our mind and our body
are mere elements which arise because of their appropriate conditions
and are devoid of self. We should consider the conditions for the
bodily phenomena which arise and fall away all the time. At the first
moment of our life kamma produced the heart-base and other rūpas
together with the rebirth-consciousness, and throughout our life kamma
continues to produce the heartbase and the sense-bases. Not only kamma,
but also citta, heat and nutrition produce rūpas of the body. The
cittas which arise are dependent on many different conditions. We tend
to forget that seeing is only a conditioned reality and that visible
object is only a conditioned reality, and therefore we are easily
carried away by sense impressions. Each citta experiences an object, be
it a sense object or a mental object, and the object conditions citta
by object-condition, ārammaṇa-paccaya. It is beneficial to remember
that seeing, hearing and the other sense-cognitions are vipākacittas,
cittas which are results of kamma. They arise at their appropriate
bases, vatthus, which are also produced by kamma. Hearing is
conditioned by sound which impinges on the earsense. Both sound and
earsense are rūpas which also arise because of their own conditions
and fall away. Thus, hearing, the reality which they condition, cannot
last either; it also has to fall away. Each conditioned reality can
exist just for an extremely short moment. When we understand this it
will be easier to see that there is no self who can exert control over
realities. How could we control what falls away immediately? When we
move our hands, when we walk, when we laugh or cry, when we are
attached or worried, there are conditions for such moments. Cittas
succeed one another without any interval. The citta that has just
fallen away conditions the succeeding citta and this is by way of
proximity-condition, anantara-paccaya. Seeing arises time and again and
after seeing has fallen away akusala cittas usually arise. In each
process of cittas there are, after the sense-cognitions have fallen
away, several moments of kusala cittas or akusala cittas, called
javana-cittas. These experience the object in a wholesome way or
unwholesome way. There are usually seven javana-cittas and each
preceding javana-citta conditions the following one by way of
repetition-condition, āsevana-paccaya. We cling to visible object, or
we have wrong view about it, taking it for a being or a person that
really exists. Defilements arise because they have been accumulated and
they are carried on, from moment to moment, from life to life. They are
a natural decisive support-condition, pakatūpanissaya-paccaya, for
akusala citta arising at this moment. The study of conditions helps us
to have more understanding of the “Dependent Origination”, the
conditional arising of phenomena which keep beings in the cycle of
birth and death. Each link of the Dependent Origination conditions the
following one by way of several types of conditions. It is necessary to
know which conditioning factors are conascent with the dhamma they
condition and which are not. The “Paṭṭhāna” helps us to
understand the deep underlying motives for our behaviour and the
conditions for our defilements. It explains, for example, that kusala,
wholesomeness, can be the object of akusala citta, unwholesome citta.
On account of generosity which is wholesome, attachment, wrong view or
conceit, which are unwholesome realities, can arise. The
“Paṭṭhāna” also explains that akusala can be the object of
kusala, for example, when akusala is considered with insight. This is
an essential point which is often overlooked. If one thinks that
akusala cannot be object of awareness and right understanding, the
eightfold Path cannot be developed.

34 Conclusion
*************

All the texts of the Tipiṭaka , including the Abhidhamma, are not
meant merely for intellectual study or memorizing, they are directed to
the practice, the development of vipassanā. All the classifications of
cittas, cetasikas and rūpas are terse reminders of the truth, they are
an exhortation to develop understanding of what appears at this moment.
This is the development of the eightfold Path leading to the
eradication of all defilements.



Local Variables:
coding: utf-8
End:
